This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I



DinivHi,, Google



,,Goo^le



•nfe



"'-•Google



,,Googlc



THE TRAGEDY OF
HOMED AND JULIET



■jGoo^le



DinivHi,, Google



THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE

GttKral Editor, C. H. HbbINIbd, Litt.D., UtUvertily o/ifimcbater



THE TRAGEDY OF
ROMEO AND JULIET



EDITED Br

ROBERT ADGER LAW, Fn.D.



D. C. HEATH &amp; CO., PUBLISHF
BOSTON NEW YOBK CHIC



THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE

A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.

KdlMd hy Kdmiind K. Clumben, B.A., Oifoid.
AS TOU LIKE IT.

Edil«db;J. 0. Smicb, M.A., Ediaburgli.
COEIOLANUS.

Edited by Edaiind E. Chunbeii, B.A., Oitord.



Edited by A. J. Wyatt, iL±., Cuubridge.
HAMLET.

Edited by Edmnnd S. ChMnbari, B.A., Oxford.
HENEY IV — FIRST PART.

Edited by ¥. W. Uoormui, B-A.. TorkiUra College.
EENEY V.

Edited by Q. a. Moore Eaitb, U.A., Cambildgs.
HENRY Vni.

Kdited by D. Nicbol BmiIJ&gt;,U.A., Edinburgh.
JULIUS C^SAR.

Edited by ArtburO. Inim, H.A., Oifoid.
KING JOHN.

Edited by G. C. Moora Bmltb, M.A., CuabridiB.
KIKQ LEAK.

Edited by D. Kiohol Smith, U.A., Edlnbnif h.
MACBETH.

Edited by Edmund K. Chamber!, B.A., OifotiL
MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.

Edited by J. C. Eioith, M.A., Edinburgh.
BICEAItD II.

EdlWd by G. H. Harford, Litt.D., Oimbildgs.
EICEAKD IlL

Edited by Q»rgQ HHdDiuld, U.A . Oilonl.
HOMEO AND JULIET.

Edited by Robert A. Lav, Ph.D. , Hunrd.
THE MERCHANT OP VENICE.

Edited by H. L. Witbera, B.A., Oiford.
THB TEMPEST.

Edited by 7. S. Boh, H.A., Oxford.
THE WINTER'S TALE,

Edited by H. B. Cbuitou, H. A, Muicheiter.
TWELFTH NIGHT.

Edited by Arthur D. Idmb, U.A, Oxford.



CopmoBT, 1916,»iD.



Printed in U. S. A.



...Google



/'liyV GENERAL PREFACE

Ik this edition of Shakespeare an attempt is made
to present the greater plays of the dramatist in their
literary aspect, and not merely as material for the study
of philology or grammar. Criticism purely verbal and
textual has only been included to such an extent as
may serve to help the student in the appreciation of
the essential poetry. Questions of date and literary
history have been fully dealt with in the Introductions,
but the larger space has been devoted to the interpre-
tative rather than the matter-of-fact order of scholar-
ship. ./Esthetic judgments are never final, but the
Editors have attempted to suggest points of view from
which the analysis of di-amatic motive and dramatic
character inay be profitably undertaken. In the Notes
likewise, while it is hoped that all unfamiliar expressions
and allusions have been adequately explained, yet it
has been thoilght even more impoi-tant to consider the
dramatic value of each scene, and the part which it
plays in relation to the whole. These general princi-
ples are common to the whole series; in detail each
Editor is alone responsible for the play or plays that
have been intiTosted to him.

Every volume of the series has been provided with a
Glossary, an Essay upon Metre, and an Index; and
Appendices have been added upon points of specJhl
interest which could not conveniently be treated in the
Introduction or the Notes. The text is based b
!n;vei-al Editors on that of the Globe edition.



CONTENTS

PaQ6

Introduction t

Dkamatis Persons 3

BoMEO AND Juliet S

Notes „ .... 123

Appendix A— The Text 187

Appendix B — Earlier Vei-sions of the Story . . 193

Appendix C — The Dutch Vei-sion of 1634 . . 208

Appendix D — Metre 213

Glossary SSI

Index of Words S37

General Index 231



,Googk



INTRODUCTION



I. HISTORY OF THE PLAY

Tbe earliest edition i of S»m«o and JvlUt, bo tax as i» knowtii la
in quarto form, dated 1597, with the title :

" A» I EicELLFSTT [ conceited Tragedie | or I Roraeo and luliet, |
As it tiath been often (with great applause) [ plaid publiquely, by
the right Ho- { nourable the L. of Huntdon \ his Seruaots. | Loif-
DOH, [ Printed by lohn Donter. j 159T."

A second Quarto was issued two years later, beanng the title :
"TttE I Most Ex^ j cellent and lamentable | Tragedie, of Romeo
I and Iid'ut. { N&amp;iely eorrected. autfmented, aad \ amejultd : | As it
hath bene sundry times publiquely acted, by the | right Honour-
able the Lord Chamberlaine [ his Seruonts. | Londom | Printed by
Thomas Creede, for Cuthlurt Burby, and are to { l&gt;e sold at his
shop neare the Bxc-hange. | 1599."

In 160!&gt; a third Qjarto appeared, substituting for the Lord Cliam-
berlain'sServantson its title-page, " theKiNosMaiestlesSeruants,"
the new name of Shakespeare's company of actors. Probably
some years later was published an undated Quarto, on some
copies of which appear for the first time the words, *' Written by
W. ShaU^pMlre." A fifth Quarto was issued in 163T. The play
was also printed in the first collection of Shakespeare's plays, made
by Heminge and Condell in what is known as the First PoUo (P I),
or Folio of 1693. and in all subsequent collected editions.

Careful investigation by many scholars has shown pretty clearly
the rclaUonship of these texts to one another. The IfiSJ Quarto(Q 1)
stands alone, and all editors agree that the Quarto of 1599 (Q S)

' Published entire in FumRss'a Variorum Edilion of Borneo and
Juiiel. Parallel texts of the first t^o Quartos have been published
and critically edited by Tycho Mommspn : Skakeapearei Romeo and
Julia (1856), and P. A. Daniel, New Shakspere Soi-iety, Series " '
(1871). Readings of Q 1 which diSermost widely from the ar
text will be found in App^idii A.



vi INTRODUCTION

posseases much greater authority. The third QaartafQS) is based
on the text of the seuond, the undated Quarto and F 1 on Q3, and
all later Quartos and Folios on those that preceded them. That is

to say, all accepted texts are l&gt;ased ultimately on Q 3.

The statement on the title-page of Q2 that the drama was " newly
correlated, augmented, and amended," after the composition of Q 1.
is believed to l&gt;e perfectly true. Mr. P. A. Daniel, who has excel-
lently edited the parallel texts, counts 3007 lines in Q 2. and only
8S33 lines in Q I. After minute investigation he finds unmistak-
able evidence that certain parts of the play were revised by the
author. But it is not generally believed that Q I represents the
play as Shakespeare wrote it before revision. The more commonly
accepted view is that Q 1 is a piratical edition " made up partly from
copies of the original play, partly from recollection and from notes
taken during the performance." However, the text of Q I is im-
portant for comparative purposes, not only because it t^nlains many
lines as they stood before revision by Shakespeare, but because in
many other cases evident corruptions in the texts of Qq Ff have
been corrected by turning to the corresponding lines in Q I.

Romfo and Ju\iet seems to have been presented on the London
stage sonie time between July, lj96,.and April, 1597, by Shake-
speare's company. The part played by one actor in early perform-
ances is known, for in Qq3, 3 the stage-direction after ir. 5. 101,
Enlsr Peter, reads Enter Will Kemp. Kemp was a famous
comedian who also played Dogberry in Huch Ado. Mr. William
Poeli conjectures that Shakespeare himself took the part of Ben-
Tolio, both on account of a supposed temperamental similarity
between the two. and because of Benvolio's hazel eyes ^ and grand-
fatherly ' appearance. But this is not to be proved.

One of the first English allusions to the play is that found in
Marston's Scourge of ViUanie (1598), as follows :

" I set thy lips abroach, from whence doth flow

Naught but pure Juliet and Romeo."

A further reference in the same passage to " Curlaine plaudeUes "

has l&gt;een taken to mean that The Curtain was the theatre in which

the tragedy was being played.* The play is again mentioned in

■ TTanaacHona of the New Skaitpere Societu, 1887-98, ii. 235-6.

» Cf. iii. 1. 81. ' Cf. ii. 4. 33.

&lt; Cf. Murray, EnglUk DTamaiic Companies 155S-36i3 (1810), i.
96. The Utie-page of Q 8 (1609) tells us that the play was tbcnacted
at the Globe.



INTR»»UCTI»N vil

Weever's Epiyramt {IS9S), aod echoed in the plays of Wily Beguikd
and The Wigdom of Doctor DodipoU. The popularity thus attested
is believed to have continued till the closing of the theatres in 164S.
Meanwhile an English company of actors playing at Dresden In
16S6 presented a somewhat debased version of the play in the
German tongue, l

Ilnmediately after the re-opening of the London theatres Borneo
and Juliet must have been revived, for Pepys saw the first perform-
ance and wrote in his Diary, March 1, 1668 i " Thence to the Opera,
and there saw Romeo and J-aiiet, the first time it vas ever acted,
but it is a play of itself the worst that ever I heard and the worst
acted that ever I saw these people do, and 1 am resolved to go
no more to see the first time of acting, for they were all of them
out moreor less." In this company Harris was playing Romeo,
Betterton Mercutio, and Miss Saunderson Juliet'

Shortly after this time James Howard altered the play to a tragi-
comedy, which saved the lives of both lovers, and it is recorded
that Howard's version and Shakespeare's were actually played on
alternate nights. But the most notable recasting of the play was
done by Thomas Otwuy, author of Venice Pretereed. In a play
called The Iliitory and Fall of Cains Jlariue, Otway attempted to
graft the plot of this tragedy on the story of one of Plutarch's
Roman heroes, frankly acknowledging in his prologue that about
half the play was Sjymeo and Juliet, Caiat Maritu was first played
at Dorset Garden in 16S0, with Betterton and Mrs. Barry taking
important parts. Later it was on the boards at both Drurj- Lane
and the Haymarket with Mrs. Brace^rdle, again with Mrs. Porter,
in the heroine's r51e, but, strange to say, each time the Nurse was
played by a man. Though this hybrid continued to be acted at
least as late as ITIT and drove Shakespeare's play from the ^age
for sixty years, modern readers find in it little to enhance Otway's
reputation.

At last in 1T44 Theophilus Cibber at the Haymarket revived
Shakespeare's play, with the addition of a few lines from Otway.
Here, as in Otway and in Da Porto before him, Juliet is made to
awake before Romeo dies li-om the poison. The revival was
attended with great success, and at Drury Lane four years later it
' Printed entire, with English translation in parallel columns, by
Cohn, SkakeajKore in Germany (1865), pp. 310 ff. An elaborate ex-
amination of this German version is made by M. J. Wolff, Shake-
tpeare Jahrbuck, ilvii. (1911). 9i (I.

* Genest, Hi*torj/ of the Enjlinh Stage (1832), 1 13.



TiU INTRODUCTION

woa acted nineteen times with Barr^and Mrs. Cibberin the leading
parts. A notable example of stage rivalry be^n SepL 8H, 1750,
when Barry and Mrs. Gibber at Covent Garden vied with Garrick
iind Miss BeLamy at Drury Lane in presenting this play night after
night till October 9 in their respective theatres. From that day to
this the play has remained a favorite with London theatre-goers.

Nor has its popularity been confined toEngland. Thefirstknown
English eoiapany of actors coming to America in 1T59, under the
leadership of Lewis Hallam, presented this as one of three Shake-
spearian plays in New York;' and when Philadelphia builtits first
permanent theatre, the Southwark, in 1766. this was among the
first plays given there.* By the end of the eighteenth century
the draraa had been translated into both German and French. Id
Germany it has been almost second to liamUt in popularity,
Goethe arranged the play for performance in the Weimaf Theatre
in I811,&gt; and this version held possession of the Berlin stage till
18*9. Duels produced a French adaptation of it in 1771, it has been
translated into French four or five times, and there are many,
echoes of Shakespeare's language, especially of the balcony scene,
in one modem French play, Rjistand's Cyrano (U Bergerac.



2. THE DATE OF THE PLAY

TTie date of composition of the play cannot be determined with
certainty. One limit is lixed by the statement on the title-page of
Q 1 that it was played by " theL. of Hunsdon his servants." Now
we know that this company of actors was so called only between
July, 1596, and April, 1597, because the First Lord Hunsdon. who
was Lord Chamberlain, died July 82, 1596, his son became Lord
Chamberlain on April 17. 1597. and except in the interval the actors
were called the Lord Chamberlain's servants. So the play muel
have been on the stage during that period. But whether it was ar
entirely new play then, whether it had been played for several years

• See Seilbamer, G. C, History of the AmerKaa Theatre (19B8), L
47. Romeo and Juliet was the only one i^ the three repeated during
the season. The other plays were Richard III and I^ear.

' Ibid., pp. 154, iSS, showing that it was played three times titat
season, as was true of no other Shakespearian drama. It had been
played in Charieston in 1784. See The Nation, xcvi. 201 (New Yoit,
1913).
' * Summariaed in Fumess's Variorum Borneo and JuUeL pp. 4i3ff.



INTRODUCTION ix

c»r whether it had already been revised from its original form aro
qiiestions hard to Eolve. Internal evidenee gives some assistance.
Many critics haveseen in the Nurse's words, "Tis since the earth-
quake now eleven years "(i, 3, 83 ; note on that hne) a definite
reference to the earthquake of 1580, which terrified all England.
On tliat ground they have dated the original composition of the
play at 1591, an assumption scarcely warranted by the nature of
the evidence. Yet the frequency of rhyme and word quibbling in
the play, its metrical characteristics in general, the passionate na-
ture of its emotion, all argue for composition during Shakespeare's
youth. We shall not go far astray then in assigning it to the pe- ^
riod between 1593 and 1595, with revision some two or three years /
after the original version was put on the stage. /

S. SOURCES OF THE PLOT

In various forms the essentia] incidents of iJortMO attd Jviiet ap-
peared in Dterary history long before Shakespeare's birth. We
may be sure that Shakespeare himself was unacquainted with
most of these versioas, yet it is interesting to trace their appear-
ance in literature.'

What is apparently the earliest literary form of the story is the
Hoveliiiia of Massuccio of Salerno (1476), in which two Sienese
lovers, Mariotto Mignanelli and Gianozza Saraceni, are secretly
wedded and then separated on the hero's flight to Alexandria fol-
lowing his committal of homicide. To avoid wedding another
maa, chosen for her by her father, Gianosza resorts to a sleeping
potitHi furnished by a friar, is delivered from the tomb, and es-
capes to Alexandria in disguise of a monk. Her messenger to
Mariotto is captured by pirates, her husband receives a false report
of her death, comes to her tomb, and attempting to break it open
is captured and beheaded. The wife dies In a convent of a broken
heart. But Luigi da Porto, in his Ittoiia di due nobili araanii
(circa 1530), first localired the story in Verona, named the lovers
Borneo and Giuliettn, and assigned a family feud as the motive for
the secret marriage. Da Porto mentions no Nurse, but his Count
of Lodrone corresponds to Paris. Romeo's courtship lasts for
many days, and his banishment ot'curs some time after the secret

' In a Greek romance by Xenophon of Epbesus, the story of
AbroetHitaa and Anthia._Srst printed iu 17*6, the heroine cscapea
from an undesired wedding by means of a sleeping potion.



X INTBODUCTION

wedding. Before the poison has alain her husband, Giulictta

awakens iu the tomb, and a pathetic diulof^e ensues, followed by
the death of both. In 1554&lt; came the impurtant prose version of
Bandello, who develops the storj' at some lengtb and employs al-
most all the charni-tcrs and incidents that appear in the versions to
which Shakespeare is immediately indebted. For example, Ban-
dello mentions charac-ters (corresponding to Rosaline and Benvolio,
and dwells on Romeo's first love, Paris is so christened, and the
Nurse is created.

From Italian the tale row passed into other languages. Rerre
Boaistuau translated Bandello into Frentch prose in his Iliatoira
Trai/iqite* (1559). making two important changes from his source.
Bandello had followed Da Porto in having Juliet waken before
Romeo's death, converse with him for some minutes, and after his
death expire froni grief. Boaistuau makes her awaken to find her
husband already dead, and upon discovering this fact, to slay herself
with his dagger.' From Boaistuau carae two, and possibly three,
Engli.'ili redactions which were known to Shakespeare. Evidence
that Shakespeare was acquainted with any foreign version is ^-
ceedingly weak.

First in importance of these English redactions is Arthur
Brooke's poem, Rumeua and Juliet, published in 1562,^ On his
title-page Brooke tells us that the " history" was "written first in
Italian by Baiidell," but his lines are evidently based on Boais-
tuau's French rather than un Bandello's Italian. In some places



The theme served also as the plot of two Spanish plays. Lope d
Vega's tragi-coniedy, Caslehinea y Monieaea, and Loa Bandos de Verona
by Francisco de Rojas. A comic Italian version, Li Iragici auccesn
(Venici', 1611). is discussed by Miss Winifred Smith in Modem PkiM-
ogy. vii. 217-80 (October. 1909). The statement made by Giro-
lamo de la Corte in his history of Verona (1561, ISM), that the story
is historically true, is not now accepted. Prince Escalus bad histori-
cal origin in the peison of Bartolomeo de la Scala, who ruled Verona
about 1303, but otherwise the plot is the product of fiction.

' A fairly complete summary of the poem is given in Appendix B
of this volume, though no attempt is there made to quote all lines or
expressions apparently echoed in the play. The entire poem has been
reprinted and edited several times, notably by P. A. Daniel for the
New Shakspere Society, Series II, 1 (1875), and more recently by
J. J. Munro. in The Shakespeare Classics (I908J.



INTR»»UCTIOy xi

Brooke's poem Is a very close banslatiOD of Boaistuau, but as a
rule he traiislates ireely, aa may easily be seep by a corDparison of
the poem with the much more literal prose translation by Painter.
Brooke roores with special freedom in his treatment of the Nurse.
He it is to whom we are first indebted for accounts of her conver-
sations with Romeo and with Juliet about Romeo, and for mention
of her bribery by the lover on her first visit to him. Brooke found
her in Boaistuau a kindly old woman, willing to aid her " nurse-
child " in the secret love affair ; he left her a typically garrulous,
vulgar, sordid female attendant whose very wickedness amuses
rather than repels. Shakespeare's whole conception of her char-
acter was caught from the pages of Brooke. Yet, as Mr. Munro
says in an admirable discussion of the merits and defects of
Brooke's work,' " There is nothing tnily organic about the whole
poem ; its parts are out of proportion ; it is loose in its construc-
tion, and vagarious in its progress. Its atmosphere is that of
melodrama, and there is not one truly noble person in it."

BoaistuHii's tale was again translated into English by William
Painter under the title of Ithiimfo and JiUietta, in the second volume
of the Palaee of PlMtsnre (1567). As already stated, this prose ver-
sion of the tale follows closely Boaistuau's French, and it is not siuv
prising Uiat Shakespeare relied on the more vivacious, even though
more prolix, narrative of Brooke rather than on Painter. How-
ever, it is probable that he did read Painter's novel before compos-
ing the drama.'

Was on English play on the subject written before Shake-
speare's ? This question seems to be answered affirmatively by
Brooke's positive statement in the preface to his poera, "Though
I saw the same argument lately set forth on stage with more com-
mendation than 1 can look for — being there much better set forth
than I have or can do — yet the same matter penned as it is may
serve to like good efiect." These words imply that it was an Eng-
lish rather than a foreign play that Brooke saw, yet this play, like
the vast majority of its contemporary dramas, is no longer extant.
If the play was still in existence thirty years after Brooke saw it, we
may be sure, from all that we know of Shakespeare's habits of
workmanship, that he would likely have taken advantage of any
hint that be could get from reading this old drama or seeing it
acted. For many years scholars have thought that this lost play,
if ever recovered, would prove to be another one of his sources.

• Brooke's Romeus and Juliet, Introd.. p, li.

* The problem is further discussed in Appendix C



xli INTRODUCTION

In its original form the play has not been rec[&gt;vered, nor 1h It
likely to be. But ret-ently Dr. Harold De Wolf FuUer has pointed
out* that a well known Dutch play. Romi^ «n JulUtle, published
in 1634, and written by Jacob Stru^js, is in all probability not a.
debased Teision founded on Shakespeare, as has been generally
thoug'ht. but on almost literal translation of a pre-Shakespearian
English play. If one accepts this statement, it will be diffitult for
him not to reach the further t-ouelusions that Struijs's " original "
was the lost play seen by Brooke as eariy as 1562, and that it
served as a source for Shakespeare. For Dr. Fuller makes it clear
that either Shakespeare knew the " original," or else Strugs was
Indebted to Brooke, Boustuau, and Shakespeare, all three.

Acceptance of Or, Fuller's theory requires belief in three propo-
sitions r BO. , (1) that a pre-Shakespearian English play of Romeo
and Julkl existed, as one would infer from Brooke's statement j
(S) that Shakespeare knew and made use of the piny ; (3) that
Struijs translated into Dutch this early English play about 1630 in
Ignorance of Shakespeare's greater work on the same subject. Of
these propositions the third is by fer the most difficult of proof.
Without attempting to follow in detail Dr. Fuller's subtle argument
on this point let it suffice to say that he makes it certain either that
Shakespeare adopted numerous hints, stage devices, and scenic
arrangements from the earlier play, or that Struijs was indebted to
Shakespeare. But these marks of the indebtedness of one play-
wright to the other are of such a nature as to impress any one
who knows both Shakespeare and the earlier English drama with
the strength of Dr. Fuller's contention. In numerous places the
Dutch play agrees with Boaistuau's end with Brooke's versions
of the story, but not with Shakespeare ; that a Dutch dramatist
should use these narrative versions as sources is unlikely. Besides,
many of Struijs's lines contain just the hints and turns of expres-
sion that acted most like ma^ic to Shakespeare's quick foucy.
Had Struijs, on the other hand, known Shakespeare's work, he
would almost certainly have made more use of it than he has done.
But while one must admit that Dr. Fuller has suggested a rational
solution for a series of baffling problems, yet, for the present at
■ In Modem Philology, iv. 75-180 (1906). A brief summary
of the Dutch play, based on Dr. Fuller's .'fummary will be found
in Appendix B of this volume. Prof. J. W. Cunliffe, in a note in
Tke Modem Language Reri'^w, vii. S?l (191-). shows that Brooke
was admitted to Uie plays of tiie Inns of Court at Christmas, 1561,
and may then have seeo the play that he mentions.



INTRODUCTION xiii

leMt, his condudoDS must be accepted with caution. Prom their
Toy DBture they do th^ admit of the proof that attends some other
results of ShalcespeariaD research.

If Shakespeare, then, was indebted to Brooke's poem, to Painter's
prose narmtive, and probably also to the lost play on the same sub-
lecti the quesUon arises as to the extent of his use of each source.
Maloae, though he was ignorant of Stru^, long ago settled all
doubts in favor of Brooke. The names assigned to various char-
acters by Shakespeare, the circumstance of Capulet's writing down
the names of bis guests, and scores of verbal similarities between
the two versions point to Shakespeare's preference for the poetic
version. To the older English play Dr. Fuller accounts Shake-
speare indebted for suggestions as to Romeo's description of Juliet
at the feast, for the meeting of the lovers by night, for Friar Lau-
rence's soliloquy before his cell, for Tybalt's motive for attack on
Borneo, for the visit of the Nurse to the Friar's cell during Romeo's
kunentatioas, for the parting words of the lovers, and for the cir~
cumstance of Mercutio's death at Tybalt's hands. To Fainter the
debt is apparently much smaller than to either of the other sources.
but in two or thiee incidents the language of Shakespeare supports
the natural inference that at one time he had read Paiotei's noveL



4. CRITICAL APPRECIATION

All this accounting of items to show the dramatist's dependence
on his predecessors may cause the reader to assign small credit to

Shakespeare for what be has done in this play. Yet no course
could involve greater misunderstandings of the master's art. Like
other great Lterary men, particularly the Elizabethans, Shakespeare
seldom or never takes the trouble to " make up " the stories with
which he works. He is willing to borrow from any convenient
material not only names and incidents for his drama, but sugges-
tions for character development, hints for motives, and if the source
chances to be another play, numerous bits of "stage business."
The careful study of hi.'i work reveals a phenomenal memory for
details of this type, and a yet more marvelous quickness in per-
ception of the possibilities lying in a casual phrase and adapt-
able to the acted drama. Grasping at once the latent meaning of
s mere turn of expression in wbat he reads or hears, he visual-
ices the situation as no one else has done. Then he moulds the
■epaiate incidents into a form approaching the perfection of uar-



xl» INTEODOCTION

■ativf and dramatic arL From hia mterpretation the characters

and eveots in some famiHar story become to our eyes so real and
so vitalized that henceforth we associate this story with Shake-

Snprema artistry of this type is illustrated in the play before us.

( From Brooke's Romeu^ and Juliet come all the essentials of Shake-

Sspeare's plot, and even the kernels of his phraseology in numerous

And yet in Shakespeare the entire conception of the men

lomeu and their actions has been transformed, enriched, and

purified ; while the verses in which the characters speak are never

the tedious, hobbling lines of Brooke, but often bursts of highest

' " ■ iring of the story may be gathered

yTrora the words of his prefece : " And to this end, cqo^ Reader, is
' 'a trjgical matter written, to describe unto theq a coupte of un-
fortunate lovers, thralling themselves to unhnnest desire ; neglect-
ing the authority and advice of parents and friends ; conferring
their principal counsels with drunken gossips and supecstitiouB
I friars (the naturally fit instriaraents of unchastity) ; attempting aU
1 adventures of peril for th' attaining of their wished lust; using
I auricular confession, the key of whoredom and treason, for further-
e of their purpose ; abusing the honourable name of lawful
I marriage to cloak the shame of stolen contracts ; finally by all
L q^n s of unhonest life hasting to most unhappy death."' Shake-
speare, taking the plot directly from Brooke, has made it world-
famous in poetry and drama as a story of unsullied though
passionate love. While the emotions are burning at no less inten-
sity than those in the similar narratives of Troilus and Criseyde, and
Tristan and Iseult, Borneo and Juliet differs from them in its strict
adherence to moral laws and in its freedom from grosser elements.
Moreover, Shakespeare has deftly suffused the play in a " tone
color" of moonht Italian gardens, in perfect harmony with the

The work is more than a dramatic poem. Its undying interest
on the stage from IS9T down to the present hour, when Miss Mar-
lowe's interpretation of Juliet delights widely scattered audiences,
attests its strong qualities as on acting drama. When one passes
either from the tiresome account of Brooke or from the loosely con-
structed earlier dramas of Shakespeare to this tragedy, one is quick
to note its organic nature, the rapidity of its movement, and the
sireness of band that characterizes most of its scenes. Despite
' Munro, p. Ixvi.



INTRODUCTION rv

■ome unmodem chtuncUrisUcs, on the boairds ti&gt;-^j the Romeo
and Juliet, acted by even a Bccond-rate company, will obtain a
strong reaction from many who are oever atnick spellbound Iq' the
magic ot the poet's name. Ita succeas as a stage play must be due
to the human interest of its appeal.

Of Shakespeare's skill in creating humorous dramatic situations,
two examples may suffice. Juliet, in Biooke's poem, laments Ty-
balt's death at Romeo's hand and denounces her kinsman's slayet
b much the same language as she uses in iii. 8. Suddenly she
checks herself and accuses " her cruel murthering tongue " of slan-
dering her husband. Now Shakespeare presents that precise situ-
ation with this important difference : Juliet's abuse of her husband
does not ceaae until she hears the Nurse echo her sentiments and
eiclaim, "Shame come to Romeo I" Immediately the wife is stung
to reply, " Blister'd be thy tongue tor such a wish," rebufc'
irst the Nia -ae and then herself for uttj^riog such words. / ^
econd situatToIT. agaiu lllVolvlng'tGe Nurse, is equally true ti
but essentially comf c, and the humor is worthy of Chauceiv To pre-
Tcnt Romeo from committing suicide oii'lieurhj); hbl (loom of banish-
[nent and to direct him to a path of safety, the Friar makes a j
speech of some fifty lines, pointing; out the cowardice and foolish-
ness of self-slaughter, and its inevitable consequence on Juliet.
He concludes this rather lengthy harangue by telling the Nurse to
lafbrm Juliet that Romeo will visit her. In open-eyed astonish-/^
aent the old woman qaculates, not what we expect, but —



Tet when critically examined as a tragedy, Someo and Julitt,
despite the excellent constructjon of its opening scene and the di-
rect movemeut toward its catastrophe, falls below the plane of
HamUU Manbetk, Ot/ullti, and other plays belonging to the period
of Shakespeare's finest art. Certain faults in the dramatic struc-
ture of Itonuo ami Juliet, critics have ^nkly recf^^ised. It has
been pointed out, for example, that the tragedy really turns upon
accident, upon a succession of unfortunate incidents, any one of
which might have resulted differently and wrought out ultimate
happiness to hero and heroine. Now in Shakespeare's later trage-
dies the outcome does not depend on chance, but is the inevitable
result of some trait Id the hero's character. A less important struc-
tural blemish concerns the climax of this play. The counterplot




rrf INTRODUCTION

meets the main plot in the last scene of Act iii, vrhere the heroine
faces the alternative of immediate forced marriage with Paris. o»
disinheHtAnre &amp;nd threatened deatii from her father. At that
moment no escape seems poBSible. But the turning point of the
lovers' fortunes has trome in an earlier scene marked by sharp ex-
citement and rapid action, the rekindling of bitter hatred between
the rival houses, the killing of two important characters, and the
IwnishmeDt of the hero from Verona, The juxtaposition of these
two climaxes mars the unity of the whole. Other faults that
we tlMj find with the play, like the injection of low comedy into
such a serious scene aa Iv. S, the fondness of Mercutio and Friar
Laurence for k&gt;ng, undramatic speeches, the digressions in iiL 5,
resulting from satire on contemporary fashions, may be accredited
to conventions of the time. Shakespeare is not It&gt;sen and does not

I attempt to reduce his plots to the simplest possible terns. Tliat is
to say, most imperfections are due either to Shakespeare's inexpe-
rience as a dramatist, or to Elizabethan habits of play-making.

Analysis of the characters reveals even more clearly the youth'
fiihiesa of the author. Juliet, so thoroughly delightful In her girl-
ishness, is the embodiment of unstained youthful passion. Her
nature presents no complexities, and afler her first meeting with
Romeo she has hut one interest in life. Her h)ver, on the other
hand, draws from her all his spiritual strength, and as soon as he ,
feels himself out of touch with her grows utterly hopeless. Be-
Dewed communion with Juliet transforms him into a man, dl-
rect, alert, and resourceliil. News of ber death begets desperate
resolution. When the servant and Paris attempt to interfere with
his course, they are brushed aside as boys. The womanly tender- .
ness of his last speech marks no decline in his niaEiculinily ; he '
boldly drinks the poison, and after a dozen words lies dead em-
bracing his wife's body. Each lover finds in the other one complete
satisfaction for all ambitions and desires. The minor characters
In the play serve mainly as foils to the larger figures. Phleg-
matic Eenvolio is opposed first to the fury of Tybalt, then to the
melancholy of Romeo, and finally to the wit of Mer&lt;'utio. Affec-
tionate Lady Montague presents a complement to spiteful Lady
Capulet. "The impetuosity of the hero is well set off by the gentle-
ness of his rival for Juliet's hand, and theopposition between them
makes Romeo's killing of Paris a dramatic necessity. This crea-
tion of one artificial character to fit the needs of another again

--. betrays the playwright's immaturity.

If this estimate be correct, the play is entitled to bigher rank



INTRODUCTION xva,

u a sjrmpatheHc porttnjral of fouthhil love than as a great world T
traged;. The tone of Its most exalted poetic passages would beSt
a romantic coroedy like A MiAmmmer Night't Dnam. With Huch I
comedies and not with the other tragedies, this drama should be
c&lt;Hnpared, if we would realize its sigoificaDce in the development
of Shakespeare's art

Judged simply as poetry, Romeo and Jnliet takes a high place In
English verse. The imperishable lines of the famous " balcony
scene"; Juliet's passionate soliloquy while awaiting her husband's
visit, a passage remarkable for its dehcacy in treating a subject so
closely akin to the sensual ; the pathetic verses in which the lovers
part at daybreak to meet no more — these n rt inBttinp'"!! [lfl"]"r
poetry of the highe st artistic value. Mr. Goliancz haspointetT'out
the strong lytic element in the coriple^_yid fragmentary sonnet^
the epitbalamium of Juliet, the BiijijlTNliiiii MTTTii^iiiiiiiiiii J,lii morniiig
after the marriage. Other types of poetry are seen in Meri'utio's
oft-quoted description of Queen Mab, in the moving scene where
Juliet drinks the sleeping-potion after painting in realistic imagery
the possible horrors attending her, in Romeo's terribly intense.
compressed speeches throughout the ia gt act. The intringic beauty
of such passages can scarcely be pointed out to those whose appre-
ciation does not arise from their own reading and study; but few
to whom Bnghsh poetiy ever makes' apfteal will remaui insensible
to these lines.

"Here's much to do with hate but more with bve "■ Our real
concern is with the two chief actors-iiLlbe tragedy, and it matters
little to us whether childish old Capulet and his ancient enemy will
finally become reconciled. Most readers would prefer to follow the
well-established custom of modem stage presentations and have the
curtain rung down and the lights put out at the point w here JuIieL'
sheathes Romeo's dagger in her own bosom. From"T.lie kJVfrSv,
standpoint this ending may be thought o£ as trappy. The bond!
that unites them has proved sufiicient to withstand the j^rrlngsf
of family hatred and the naturally strong ties of filial obligation. i
It has enabled them to triumph over all outward circumstances,.
even over the resentment stirred by the slaying of a favorite kins- f
man. The very stars that have apparently conspired against the ,
fortunes of the pair are at last defied. In their death Romeo and \ -
Juhet are not divided. Their love is immortal I

J



"'■•■•Google



THE TRAGEDY OF
ROMEO AND JULIET



■jGoo^le



DRAMATIS PERSONS

EscALUs Prince of Verona

Paris . . A young nobleman, kinsnutn to the Prince
MoNTAGui: ? Heads of two houseSj at variance with each
Capulet ) other

An Old Man Cousin to Capulet

RoMBO Son to Montagae

I, Kinsman to the Prince, and friend to Romeo
lo. Nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo

Tybalt Nephew to Lady Capulet

Friar Lauhbncb )

■- , &gt; Franciscans

Friar John )

Balthasar Servant to Romeo

SAMPaON ) f ^ 1

■^ - &gt; servants to Capulet

Orboory j

Peter Servant to Juliet's nurse

Abraham Servant to Montague

An Apothecary
Three Musicians
Page to Paris ; another Page ; an Officer

Lady Montague Wife to Montague

Lady Capwlet Wife to Capulet

Juliet Daughter to Capulet

Nurse to Juliet

Citizens of Verona; several Men and Women, relations
to both houses; Maskers, Guards, Watchmen, and
Attendants.

Chorus
SCENE — Veroi^v: Mantua



'^EROMV :

1



Romeo and Juliet

prologue

Enler Chorus

Chor. Two households, both alike in dignity.
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene.

From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
AAf ^Tiere ci vil blood makes civil hands unclean.

From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair nf ala.r-rross 'd lovers take their life;

Whose misadventured piteous overthrows

Do with their death bury their parents' strife.

The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love.
And the continuance of their parents' rage, lo

Which, but their children's end, nought could re-
Is now the twg.t2111sI-tiaiffi£.of our stage; "=£■*&lt;.

The which if you with patient ears attend.

What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.

[Exit.



,,Goo^le



« ACT I

ScENB I — Verona, A public place

Elder Sampson and Grbgory of the kouie of Capvixt,^
armed mth mords cmd buctlers ^t'^^li^

Sam. Gregory, o' my word, we '11 not carry cn^ ».

Gre. No, for then we should be colliers.

Sam. I mean, an we be in choler, we '11 draw.

Gre. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o'
the collar.

Sam. I strike quickly, being moved.

Gre. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

Sam. A dog of the house of Montague moves me. i

Gre. To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to
stand: therefore, if thou art move d, thou runu*st
away.

Sam. A dog of that house shall move me to
stand: I will ta ke the wqll of any man or maid of
Montague's.

Gre. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weak-
est goes to the wall.

Sam. True; and thetef ore women, being the
weaker vessds, are ever thrust to the wall : therefore (
I will push Montague's men from the wall, and thrust
his maids to the wall.

Gre. The quarrel is between our masters and us
tlieir men.



ScEM Om] , ROMEO AND JULIET 5

Sam. '^ is all one, I will show myself a tyrant:
when I have fought with the men, I will be cruel
with the maids, and cut off their heads.

Gre. The heads of the maids P

Sam. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maiden- w ^
heads; take it in what seflse thou wilt.

Gre. They must take it in sense that feel it.

Sam. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand :
and 't is known I am a pretty piece of flesh. JiJ^jA ^

Gre. 'Tis well thou art not Qsh; if thou hadst, y^^tt4
thou hadst been poor .Tofan . Draw thy tool; here T'-^*h^
comes two of the house of the Montagues.

Sam. My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will
back thee. 40

Gre. How! turn thy back and run?

Sam. Fear me not. /j* J

Gre. No, marry; I fear thee! ^.d**^^

iSom. Let us take the law of our sides; let them
begin.

Gre. I will frown as I pa^s by, and let them take
it as they list.

SoTW. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb

at them; which is a disgrace to them, if they bear

it. m

Enter Abraham imd Bai.thasar

Abr. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
iSawi. 1 do bite my thumb, sir. !

Abr. Do you bite your thutnb at us, sir?
Sam.. [Aside to Gbe.] Is the law of our side, if I I

say ay?

Ore. No. I



6 ROMEO AND JULIET, [Act Oub

Sam. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir;
but I bite my thumb, sir,

Gre. Do you quarrel, sir?

Abr. Quarrel, sir! no, sir. «

Sam. If you do, sir, I am for you : I serve as good
a man as you.

Abr. No better.

Sam. Well, sir,

Gre. Say "better": here comes one of my mas-
ter's kinsmen.

Sam. Yes, better, sir.

Alnr. You lie.

Sam. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember
thy swashing blow. [TheyfigfU.



Etiter Benvouo



^rj;^^



Ben. Part, fools!
Put up your swords ;j[ou_^ownot what you do.

[BeaU dawn their swords.

Elder Tybalt ^^ &lt;£^SSj^

Tyb. WTiat, art thou drawn among these heart-
less hinds?
Turn thee, Benvoho, look upon thy death.

Ben. I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword.
Or manage it to part these men with me.

Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the
word.
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward. [TheyfighL



Sctme Oke] ROMEO AND JULIET 7

Enlo" several of both houses, tvhojoin the fra^}
then enter Citizens, wUh clubs

First Cit. Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat

them down! bo

Down with the Capuleta! down with the Montagues!

Enter Capulet in his gomn, and Ladv Capulet
Ca'p. What noise is thisP Give me my long

sword, ho!
La. Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for

a sword?
Cap. My sword, I say! ,01d Montague b come.
And flourishes his blade IiClsm^of me^

Enter Mohtagub and Lady Montaqub
Mim. Thou villain Captilet, — Hold me not, let

me go.
La. Man. Tliou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.

Enter Pkinck, mth Attendants W, ^^^^^^
Prin. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stain^ steel, —
Will they not hear? Whaf, ho! you men, you

beasts, '''.^f*^ '.'.'■.'■ j • ■" ■ *" m

That quench the fite of your pernicious rage
With pufple fountains issuing from your veins.
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground.
And hear the sentence of your movSd prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word.
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,



8 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Om

Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets.
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments, i*

To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
If ever you disturb our streets again.
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace,
For this time, all the rest depart away:
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
And, Montague, come you this afternoon.
To know our further pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart. ii

[Exeunt all but Montague, Lady Montague,
and Benvolio.

Mon. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by, when it began?

Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary.
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
I drew to part them: in the instant came ^

The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared, *

Which, as lie breathed defiance to my ears.
He swung about his head and cut the winds.
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn:
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows, it
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the prince came, who parted either part.

La. Mon. O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-
day?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east.



ScEKE Oke] ROMEO AND JULIET 9

A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;

Where, underneath the grove ot sycamore

That westward rooteth from: the city's side,

So early walking did I see your son: ii

Towards him I made, but he was war^ of me

And stole into the covert of the wood;

I, measuring his affections by my own.

That most are busied when they 're moat alone.

Pursued my humour, not pursuing his.

And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

Mon. Many a morning hath he there been seen.
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew.
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun u

Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed.
Away from light steals home my heavy son.
And private in his chamber pens himself.
Shuts up his windows, locks fair dayhght out
And makes himself an artificial night:
Black and portentous must this humour prove.
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

Mon. I neither know it nor can learn of him. ii

Ben. Have you importuned him by any means?

Mon. Both by myself and many other friends:
But he, his own affections' counsellor.
Is to himself — iwiH not say how true —
But to himself so secret and so close.
So far from sounding and discovery.
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, '



10 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act One

Or dedicate his beauty to the aun.

Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow, leo

We would as willingly give cure as know.

Enlcr RouBo

Sen. See, where he comes: so please you, step
aside;
I '11 know his grievance, or be much denied.

Mon. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay.
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let 's away.

[Exeunt Montague and Lady.
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Rom. Is the day so young?

Ben. But new struck nine.
Rom. Ay met sad hours seem long.

Was that my father that went hence so fast?

Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's

hours?
Rom. Not having that, which, having, makes

them short. ito

In love?
Out —
Of love?
^Out of her favour, where I am in love.
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,. ,

' Should be so tyrannous and rough inkpot f y \ . Ci
,, Rom. Alj*6,^ that lovye, -(jAose yiew^mlifffife still.
Should; wityoot eyes, see ^yiways tb'his will!
Where shalllwe dine? O meiy What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all. iso

Here s much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why, then, brawling love! O loving hate!



Scene Ohe] ROMEO AND JULIET 11

any thing, of nothing first create!

heavy lightness ! serious vanity !

Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!

Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!

Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!

This love feel I, that feel no love in this.

Dost thou not laugh?

Ben. Nq, coz, I rather weep.

Horn. Good heart, at what?

Ben. At thy good heart's oppression, le

Rom. Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie-heayy jn my breast,
Which thou wilt propa^te, w'-lrave it prest
With more of thine : this iove that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too-much of mine own.
Lovejs a Smoke raised with the fume of sjghs;
Beiqiff^ih'gWra fii*e^ sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Beii^ vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
A choking gall and a preserving sweet. u

Farewell, my coz.

Ben. Soft! I will go along;

An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

Rom. Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
This is not Romeo, he 's some other where.

Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.

Rom. What, shall I groan, and tell thee?

Ben. Groan! why, no;

But sadly tell me who.

Rom. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill !
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman. *i



12 BOMEO AND JULIET [Act Ok«

Ben. I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.
Rom. A right good mark-man! And she 's iair

I love.
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
f Rom. Well, in that hit you miss: she '11 not be
hit
With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd.
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms.
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold: - m

Bedies sntlrteauty dies h^^fe)^^- ■
Then she nath sworn that she^nll swH'
live chaste?

Rom. She hath, and in that sparing makes hi^
waste.
For heauty starved with her severity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair.
To merit bliss by making me despair:
She bath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead that live to tell it now. «

Ben. Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
Rom. 0, teach me how I should forget to think.
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.

Rom. T is the way

To call hers exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
Being black put us in mind they bide the fair;



Scare Two] EOMEO AND JULIET 13

He that is strucken blind amnot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
Show me a mistress that is passing fair, u

What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
Where I may read who pass'd that passing f^?
Farewell : thou canst not teach me to forget,
Ben. I '11 pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
[Exemd.



Enlo" Capuut, Paris, and Servant
lU-.-. ■: ■.'./ ■'

Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and 't is not hard, I think.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

Par. Of honourable reckoning are you both;
And pity 't is you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what 3ay_you t o my suit?

Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
My child is yet a stranger in the world;
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Let two more summers wither in their pride, i

Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

Par. Younger than she are happy mothers made.

Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early
made.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she.
She is the hopeful lady of my earth :
But woo her, gentle Paris,, get her, Ije%rt,
My will to her consent is tut a part;
An she agree, within her scope of choice



14. ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Oxe

Lies my consent and fair according voice.

This night I hold an old accustom 'd feast, so

Whereto I have invited many a guest,

Such a^ I love; and you, among the store,

Ooe more, most welcome, makes my number

more.
At my pqdr-houE^ Iook.to,bfeh&lt;fld thi&amp;i^ht ^ j' ■
EfltJ^ti^dWi^^Htti^^*-tfiit- iba3ie*'-d'arK' heaven

light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such ddight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see, »o

And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which on more view, of many mine heing one
May stand in number, though in reckoning none.
Come, go with me. [To Scttj., giving a paper] Go,

sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

[ExeuTU Capulet and Parig.
Serv. Find them out whose names are written
here! It is written, that the shoemaker should med-
dle with his yard, and the tailor with his last, the 4C
fisher with bis pencil, and the painter with his nets;
but I am sent to find those persons whose names
are here writ, and can never find what names the
writing person hath here writ. I must to the
learned. — In good time.



ScDd Two] ROMEO AND JULIET 15

Elder Bbnvolto and Romeo

Ben. Tut, maa, one fire buras out another's
burning,

One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward tumiag;

One desperate grief cures with another's languish :
Take thou some new infection to thy eye, so

And the rank poison ot the old will die.

Bxna. Your plaintain-Ieaf is excellent for that,

Ben. For what, I pray thee?

i£om. Far yoiu- broken shin.

jBcn. Why, Romeo, art thou^mad?

Rom. Not mad, but bound more than a mad-
man is;
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp'd and tormented and— God-den, good fellow,

Sctt. God 'Qi^'^ai-iien. t^ pray,' sir,; can you
read? J ] J

Rom. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery. m

Serv. Perhaps you have learned it without
book: but, I pray, can you read any thing you
see?

Rom. Ay, it I know the letters, and the language.

Serv. Ye say honestly : rest you merry!

Rom. Stay, fellow; I can read. [Reads.

"Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the
lady widow of Vitruvio; Signior Flacentio and
bis lovely nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valen- to
tine; mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daugh-
ters; my fair niece RosaUne; Livia; Signior Va-



16 ROMEO AND JULIET fAcr Chre

lentio, and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio and the lively

Helena."

A fair aasembly: whither should they come?

Serv. Up.

Rom. Whither?

Sere. To supper; to our house.

Rom. Whose house?

Serv. My master's. s

Rom. Indeed, I should have ask'd you that
before.

Sert). Now I 'U teU you without asking: my
master is the great rich Capulet; and if you be
not of the house of Montagues, I pray, come and
crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! [Exit.

Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest.
With all the admired beauties of Verona:
Go thither; and with unattainted eye i

Compare her face with some that I shall show.
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

Rom. When the devout religion of mine eye

M^ntains such falsehood, then turn tears to
fires;
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
' Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
I Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

Ben. Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by.
Herself poised with herself in either eye; II

But in that crystal scales let there be veigh'd
Your lady's love ag^nst some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast.



ScENB Three] ROMEO AND JOLIET 17

And she shall scant show well that now shows
best.
Rom. I'll go along, no such sight to he shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of mine own. [Exeurti.



Scene III — A room in Capulet't kowte
Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse

La. Cap. Nurse, where 's my daughter? call her

forth to me.
NuTte. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year
^ old,
I bade her come. What, Iamb! what, lady-bird!
God forbid! Where 's this girl? What, Juliet!

: Enter Juliet

Jul. How now! who calls?

Nurse. Your mother.

Jul. Madam, I am here.

What is your will?

La. Cap. This is the matter: — nurse, give leave
awhile.
We must talk in secret: — nurse, come back again;
I have remember'd me, thou 's hear our counsel.
Thou know'st my daughter 's of a pretty age. i

Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

La. Cap. She 's not fourteen.

Nurse. I 'II lay fourteen of my teeth, —

And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four, —
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide? , - - —



1^1 fi,„ta^J&gt; 1^



18 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Om

La. Cap. A fortnight and odd daya.

Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year.
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she — God rest all Christian souls! —
; Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
' She was too good for me: but, as I said, t

On Lammas-eve at night shall she be foiu-teen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
T is since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean'd, — I never shall forget it, —
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug.
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall:
My lord aiid you were the* at Mantua: —
Nay, I do^kribi^Wfi^^'hutrasTsaitf.i
When it did taste the "wormwood on the/nipple &gt;i

Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool.
To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug!
" Shake " quoth the dove-house: 't was no need, I

trow.
To bid me trudge:

And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood.
She could have run and waddled all about;
. [For even the day before, she broke her brow:
I And then my husband — God be with his soul!
'A was a merry man — took up the child : *t

" Yea," quoth he, " dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule? " and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying and said " Ay."
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!



Scene Tmee] EOMEO AND JULIET 19

I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,

I never should forget it: " Wilt thou not, Jule? "

quoth he;
And, pretty fool, Jt stinted, and said " Ay."
La. Cap. Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy

peace.
Nurse. Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but

laugh, M

To think it should leave crying, and say " Ay."
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
" Yea," quoth my husband, " fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward, when thou comest to i^e;
Wilt Uiou not, Jule? " it stinted, and said " Ay."
Jid. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse,

say I.
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to
his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed: ao
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.

La. Cap. Marry, that " marry " is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?
Jul. It ia an hono jt that I dream not of.
Nurte. An honour I were not I thine only nurse,
I would s^ thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy
teat.
La. Cap. Well, think of marriage now; younger
than you.
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem, 7fl









30 ROMEO AND JULIET [An Om

Are made alreiuly mothers : by my count,
I was your mother much upon these years .
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
As all the worid — why, he 's a man of wax.

La. Cap. Verona's summer hath not such a
flower.

Nvrie. Nay, he 's a flower; in faith, a very
flower.
i La. Cap. What say you? can you love the

■ gentleman? ,
This night you shall behold him at our feast; t

Bead o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Examine every sev^af lineament
And see how one another lends content.
And what obscured in this fair volume lies,
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover.
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea, and 't is much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide: i

That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less. /

Nurse. No less! nay, bigger; women grow by
men.

La, Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris'
love?

Jul. I '11 look to like, if looking liking move:



ScME Foot] ROMEO AND JULIET 21

But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Enter a Servant
Sen. Madam, the guests are come, supper i«
served up, you called, my young lady asked for,
the nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in
extremity. I must heace to wait; I beseech you,
follow straight.

La. Cap. We follow thee. [Exit Servant.] Juliet,

the county stays.
NuTie. Go, girl, seek happy nighU to happy
days. [Exeunt.

ScBNB IV — A Street
Enter Boheo, Mercutio, Bbnvolio, tmlA Jive or tix

Maskers, Torch-bearers, and others
Rom. Whal, shall this speech be spoke for our
excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?

Sen. The date is out of such prolixity.
We 11 have no Cupid hoodwink 'd with a scarf.
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath.
Scaring the ladies iikcja crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will;
We '11 measure them a measure, and be gone. i'

Ram. Give me a torch: I am not for this
ambling;
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

t=*'8k



22 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Obe

Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you

dance.
Rom. Not I, believe me: you have daDcing
shoes
With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

Mer. You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings.
And soar with them above a common bound.

Rom. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound, i

I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burdea
love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

Rom. Is love a tender thingP it is too raugh,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with
love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in:
A. visor for a visor! what care I i

vVhat curious eye doth quote deformities?
. Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.

Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in.
But every man betake him to his legs.
Rom. A torch for me: let wantons light of
heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels.
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
I '11 be a candle-holder, and look on.
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

t^^'gi'^



&amp;.IME FotiE] ROMEO AND JULIET 28

Afer. Tut, dun '3 the mouse, the constable's
own word: t

If thou art dun, we '11 draw thee from the mire
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou sti«k'st
Up to the ears. Come, we-^rffn^oJ^'B^t; IwV^'^^

Rom. Nay, that 's not so.

Mer. I mean, sir, in delay

We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Kve times in that ere once in our five wits.

Ram. And we mean well in going to this mask;
But 't is no wit to go.

Mer. Why, may one ask?

Rom. I dream'd a dream to-night.

Mer. - And so did I. s

Rom. Well, what was yours?

Mer. ' That dreamers often lie.

Rom. In bed asleep, while they do dream things
true.

Mer. 0, then, I see. Queen Mab hath been with
you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes,
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the forefinger of an alderman.
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers, e

The traces of the smallest spider's web.
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams.
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film.
Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat.



&lt;fs



24 ROMEO AND JULIET (Act Ok3

Not half so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
; Time out o' mind the fairies* coachniakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night i

Through lovers' br^jis, and then they dream of

love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream oa court'sies

straight,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on feea.
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream.
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues.
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep, t

Then dreams he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades.
Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes.
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs, i

.' Which once untangled much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs.
That presses them and learns them first to bear.
Making them women of good carriage:



Snare I^] EOMEO AND JULIET 25

This is aue —

Rtmi. \ Peace, peace! Mercutio, peace!

Thou talk St of nothing.

Mer. True, I talk of dreamsi

Which are the children of an idle brain.
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy.
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes ic
Even now the frozen bosom of the north.
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence.
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

Ben. Thb wind you talk of, blows us from our-
selves;
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

Rom. I fear, too early; for my mind mis^ves
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast, ii

By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But He, that hath the steerage of my course.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.

Ben. Strike, drum. [Exeunt.



Scene V — A kail ia Cajmlet's house
Musicians tvaiting. Enter Serving-men, tvitk napkin*

First Serv. Where 's Potpan, that he helps
not to take away? he shift a trencher? he scrape
a trencher!

Sec. Serv, When good manners shall lie all in



i
J

26 ROMEO AND JULIET (Act Owb

one or two men's hands, and they unwr-^ed too,
't is a foul thing.

First Serv.. Away with the joint-s.iols, re
move the court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good
thou, save rae a piece of marchpane; and, as thou
1 lovest me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone lo
and Nell. Antony, and Potpan !

Sec. Serv. Ay, boy, ready.

First Serv. You are Iook|:d for and called for,
asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.

Sec. Serv. We cannot be here and there too.
Cheerly, boys; be brisk awhile, and the longer
liver take all.

Enter Capulet, niik Juliet and others of his house, meet-
ing the Guests arid Maskers
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their

toes
Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah ha, my mistresses! ^ich of you all «o

Will now deny to das^e? she that makes dainty.
She, I 'II swear, hath corns; am I come near ye

now? ■'■

Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor, and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear, I

Such as would please: 't is gone, 't is gone," 't is gone :
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians,

play.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, giris.

[Muaic "plays, and they dance.
More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up.



Scene Five] ROMEO AND JULIET 27

And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot. i

Ah, sirrah, thb unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
For you and I are past our dancing-days:
How long is 't now, since last yourselE and I
Were in a mask?
Sec. Cap. By 'r lady, thirty years.

Cap. What, man! 't is not so much, 't is not so
much:
'T b since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come pentecost as quickly as it will.
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.
Sec. Cap. 'T is more, 't is more: his son is elder,
sir; *

His son is thirty.

Cap. ■ Will you tell me that ?

His son was but a ward two years ago.
Rmn. [To a Serviftg^man] What lady is that,
which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?
Sctt. I know not, sir.

Rom. O, she doth teach the torches to bum
bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in an,Ethiope's ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows, t

As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I 'II watch her place of stand.
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night. .



\



«8 ROMEO AND JULIET [fi-pt Om

Tyb. Tliis, by Ms voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face.
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? *

Now, by the stock and honour of my kin, ei

To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

Cap. Why, how now, kinsman ! wherefore storm
you so?

Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite.
To 3Com at our solemnity this night.

Cap. Young Borneo is it?

Tyb. 'T is he, that viUain Romeo.

Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
He bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-govem'd youth: i

I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
It is my will, the which if thou respect.
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns.
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

Tyb. It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
I '11 not endure him.

Cap. He shall be endured:

What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
Am I the master here, or you? go to. i

You '11 not endure him! God shall mend my soult
You 'U make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you '11 be the man!

Tyb. Wfiy, uncle, 't is a shame.



Scene Five] ROMEO AND JULIET 29

Cap. Go to, go to;

You are a saucy boy: is 't so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
You must contrary me! marry, 't is time.
Well said, my hearts! You are a prineox; go:
Be quiet, or — More light, more hght! For shame!
I 'II make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts! (
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meet-
ing
Makes toy flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall. [Exit.
Rom. {To Juliet] If I profane with my un-

worthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Jxd. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too

much.
Which mannerly devotion shows in this; lo

For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do
touch.
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
Rom,. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers

too?
Jvl. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in

prayer.
Rom. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands
do;
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Jvl. Saints do not move, though grant for
prayers' sake.



30 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Onk

Rom. Then move uot, while my prayer's effect I
take.
Thus from my Hps, by yours, my sin is pui^ed.
Jul. Then have my lips the sin that they have

took. ij'

Rom. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly
urged !
Give me my sin again.
JW. ^ ^ou kLss bv th e book.

NuTse. Madam, your mother craves a word with

you.
Rom. What is her mother?
NuTse. Many, bachelor,

Her mother is the lady of the house.
And a good lady, and a wise, and virtuous:
I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the dliuks. ',

Rom. la she a Capulet?

dear account! my life is my foe's debt. ii
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Bom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;

We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e'en so? Why, then, I thank you all;

1 thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let 's to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;

I 'II to my rest. \Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse.
Jul. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentle-
man? I'
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.



ScDn Five] ROMEO AND JULIET SI

Jid. What '3 he that now is going out of door?

Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio,

Jwi. What '3 he that follows there, that would
not dance P

Nurse. I know not.

Jul. Go, ask his name: if he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
The only son of your great enemy,

Jul. My only love sprung from my only hatel uo
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me.
That I must love a loathed enemy.

Nurse. What 's thb? what 's this?

Jid. A rhyme I leam'd even now

Of one I danced withal.

\One calls within " Juliet."

Nurse. Anon, anon!

Come, let 's away; the strangers all are gone.

[ExeunL



..n,™,, Google



PROLOGUE
Enter Chords

CkoT. Now old desire doth in his death-bed He,

And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groaned for and would die,

With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved, and loves again.

Alike bewitched by the charm of looks.
But to his foe supposed he must complain.

And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access

To breathe such vowa as lovers use to swear; i

And she as much in love, her means much less

To meet her new-beloved any where:
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet.
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet, [ExU.

Scene I — A lane by the wall of Capulefs orchard
Enter Roheo
Rom. Ca.n,I go forward when ftiy.I^r)^ is b^re?
Turn back, duff tarthVand find thy tentife out,

[He climbs the wall, and leaps down wUkin ii.

Enter Benvolio attd Mkrcutio
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo!
Mer. He is wise;

And on my life, hath stol'n him home to bedk .



Scd™ Ohe] ROMEO AND JULIET 33

Ben. He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard
wall:
Call, good Mercutio.

Mer. Nay, I '11 conjure too.

Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but " Ay me! " pronounce but " love " and

" dove; " li

Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir.
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim.
When King Cophetua loved the beggar- maid !
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjm^ him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip.
By her fine foot, straight leg, and ^uilvenngjlugb
And the demesnes that there adjacent tie, 3C

That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Mer. This cannot anger him : 't would anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
That were some spite: my invocation
Is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name
I conjvre only but to raise up him.

Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these

trees, ■(

To be consorted with the humorous night:
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.



S* ROMEO AND JULIET "(Act Two

Mer. If love be blind, love cannot bit tbe mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar-tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
O, Borneo, that she were, 0, that she were
An open et cxlera, thou a poperin i&gt;ear!
Romeo, good night: I '11 to my truckle-bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep: i

Come, shall we go?

Ben. Go, then; for 't is in vain

To seek faim here that means not tobe found.

[ExeutU.
Scene II — Capulefs orchard
Enter Roheo

Rom. He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
{Juliet appears above, at a window.
^ But, soft! what light through yonder window
• fT breaks?

■ y' . It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
J^jT^ Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
^ Who is already sick and pale with grief.

That thou her maid art far more fair than she:

Be not her maid, since she is envious;

Her vestal livery is but sick and green

And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.

It is my lady, O, it is my love! n

0, that she knew she were!

She speaks, yet she says nothing: what of that?

Her eye discourses; I will answer it.

I am too bold, 't is not to me she speaks:

Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven.



ScEME Twe] ROMEO AND JULIET 35

Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven t

Would through the airy region stream so bright.
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
0! that I were a glove upon that hand.
That I might touch that cheek!

Jul. Ay me!

Rom. She speaks;

O, speak ag^n, bright angel! for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head.
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him s

When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

Jul. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou
Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but. sworn my love.
And I '11 no longer be a Capulet,

Rom. [Aside.] Shall I hear more, or shall I
speak at this?

Jill. T is but thy name that is my enemy; ,
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What 's Montague? it b nor hand, nor foot, *'

Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. 0, be some other name!
What 's in a name? that which we call a rose



S6 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

B^jay other name woxxld smell as sweet;
So Romeo mould, were he hot Romeo call'd.
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name.
And for that name which is no part of thee
Take all myself. •

Rom. I take thee at thy word:

Call me but love, and I '11 be new baptized; gi

Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

Jvl. What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in
night
So stumblest on my counsel?

Rom. By a name

r know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself.
Because it is an enemy to thee;
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

Jvl. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred
words
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague? *i

Rom. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.

Jul. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and'
wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

Rom. With love's light wings did I o'er-perch
these walls;
For stony limits cannot hold love out.
And whatjove can do, that dares loveattempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.



Scb™ Two] EOMEO AND JULIET 37

Jul. If they do see thee, they will murder thee. 70

Rom. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet.
And I am proof against their enmity.

Jul. I would not for the world they saw thee
• here.

Rom. I have night's cloak to hide me from their
sight;
And but thou love me, let them find me here :
My life were better ettded by their hate.
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

Jjd. By whose direction found'st thou out this
place?

Horn. By love, who first did prompt me to in-

o.uire; so

He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.

Jul. Thou know'st the mask of night ia on my
face.
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
F^ would I dwell on forro, fain, fain deny . ■ • ■
What I have spoke: but ^^wdl cdmpliinent!
Dost thou love me? I know thou wi!t say " Ay," so
And I will take thy word: yet, if thou swear'st.
Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
I II frown and be perverse and say thee nay.



S8 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

So thou wilt woo; but, else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond.
And therefore thou mayst think my 'haviour light:
But trust me, gentleman, I '11 prove more true loi
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess.
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware.
My true love's passion: therefore pardon me.
And not impute this yielding to light love.
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

Rom. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops —

Jul. 0, swear not by the moon, the -inconstant

That monthly changes in her circled orb, n

Lest that thy love prove likewise variable,

Rom. What shall I swear by?

Jul. Do not swear at all;

Or, if thou wilt, swear by 'thy gracious self.
Which is the god of my idolatry.
And I '11 believe thee.

Rom. If my heart's dear love —

Jul. Well, do not swew: although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this cwiltract to-night:
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say, " It lightens." Sweet, good night! u
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath.
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast !

Rom. O, wilt thou leave -me so unsatisfied?



ScEBE Two] ROMEO AND JULIET 39

Jul. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?

Ram. The exchange of thy love's faithful vow
for mine.

Jid. I gave thee mine before thou didst request
it:
And yet I would it were to give again.

Rom. Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what pur-
pose, love? IS'

Jul. But to be frank, arid give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
My bounty is as boundless as the sea.
My love as deep; the more I give to thee.
The more I havti, for both are infinite.

[Nurse cfdls vntkin.
I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again. , [Exit, above.

Rom. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream, u

Too flatteiii^-sweet to be substantial.

Re-erUer Juliet, above

Jul. Three words, dear R*Mneo, and good night
indeed. I

If that thv bent of love be honourable.
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow, j
By one that I '11 procure to come to thee, I

Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
And all my fortunes at thy foot I '11 lay,
And follow t hee my lord throughout the world.

'Nurse. [Within] Madam!



40 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

Jvl. I come, anon. — But it thou mean'st not

well, 160

I do beseech thee —

NuTse. {Wiihin\ Madam!

Jvl. By and by, I come: —

To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
To-morrow will I send.

Rom. So thrive my soUl —

Jvl. A thousand times good night! [Esnt, (^xme. .
Rom. A thousand times the worse, to want thy
light.
Love goes toward love, as school-boys from their

books.
But love from love, toward school with heavy-
looks. [Retiring.

Re-enier Juliet, above

Jul. Hist! Romeo, hist! 0, for a falconer's
voice.
To }ure this tassel-gentle back again! le

Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies.
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine.
With repwtition of my Romeo's name.

Rom. It is my soul that calls upon my name:
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night.
Like softest music to attending ears!

Jul. Homeo!

Rom. My dear?

Jvl. At what o'clock to-morrovir

ShaU I send to thee?



ScEKiTwo] EOMEO AND JULIET 41

Rom. At the hour of nine.

Jul. I will not fail: 't is twenty years till then, iia
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

Rom. Let me stand here till thou remember it.

Jtd. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there.
Remembering how I love thy company.

Rom. And I 'U still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

Jul. T is almost morning; I would have thee
gone:
And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, iso

And with a silk thread plucks it back again.
So loving-jealous of his Uberty.

Rom. I would I were thy bird.

Jid. Sweet, so would I:

Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night! parting ia such sweet

sorrow.
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

[ExU above.

Rom. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy
breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell.
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell. {Ei^. isn



,,Goo^le



42 ROMEO AND JULIET [A^r Two

Scene III — Friar Lawence't cell
Enter Friaa Laurence, with a basket

Fri. L. The grey-eyed mom smiles on the frown-
ing night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaka of light.
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reek
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must up-flll this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious- juiced flowers,
The earth that 'a nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave that is her womb, i

And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find.
Many for many virtues excellent.
None but for some and yet all different.
O, mickle Is the powerful grace that lies
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
For nought so vile tliat on the earth doth' live
But to the earth some special good doth give.
Nor aught so good, but, strained from that fair use
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse: a

Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each

part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart
Two such opposM kings encamp them still



Scene TBmEE] ROMEO AND JULIET 48

In man as well as herbs, grace, and rude will;

And where the worser is predominant.

Full soon the canker death eats up that plant. »

Enter Romeu

Rom. Good morrow, father.

Fri. L. Benedicitel

What early tongue ao sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed :
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye.
And wliere care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art up-roused by some distemperature; n

Or if not so, then here I hit it right.
Our ^omeo hath not been in bed to-night.

Rom. That last is true; the sweeter rest was
mine.

Fri, L. God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?

Rom. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

Fri. L. That 's my good son : but where hast thou
been, then?

Rom. I '11 teli thee, ere thou ask it me agun.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me, ■&lt;

That 's by me wounded : both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, b.
My intercession likewise steads my*oe.

.,,.-.., ...Google



41 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

Fri. L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy
drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

Rom. Then plainly know, my heart's dear love
is set
' On the tair daughter of rich Capulet:
■ As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combined, save what thou must combine a
By holy marriage: when and where and how
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
I 'U tell thee as we pass; but this I pray.
That thou consent to marry us to-day.

Fri. L. Holy Saint Francis, what a cliange is here!
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear.
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
'3esu Maria, what a deal of brine

Hath wash'd thy sallow, cheeks for Rosaline! i

How much salt water thrown away in waste.
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears.
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes tliine.
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline;
And art thou changed ? pronounce this sentence, then.
Women may fall, when there 's no strength in men. i

Rom. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
■ Fri. L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

flom. And bad'st me bury love.

Fri. L. Not in a grave.



i



Scms Foub] ROMEO AND JULIET 45

To lay one in, another out to have.

Rom. I pray thee, chide not: she whom I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
The other did not so.

Fn. L. O, she knew well

Th y love did p'ad hy mtf and could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I '11 thy assistant be; s

For this alliance may so happy prove.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
Rpm. O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.
Fri. L. Wisely and slow; they stumble that run
fast. [Exeunt,

ScBNB IV — A Stred
Enter Benvolio and Mbrcdtio

Mer. Where the devil should thb Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?

Ben. Not to his father's; I spoke with his man. .

Mer. Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench,
that Rosaline,
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.

Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

Mer. A challenge, on my life.

Ben. Romeo will answer it.

Mer, Any man that can write may answer a

letter. ' n

Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master,
how he dares, being dared.

Mer. Alas, poor Romeo! he is already dead;



46 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

stabbed with a white wench's black eye; shot
thorough the ear with a love-song; the very pin
of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-
shaft; and is be a man to encounter Tybalt?

Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?

Mer. More than prince of cats, I can tell you.
0, he is the courageous captain of complements, to
He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time,
distance, and proportion; rests me his minim
rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom: the
very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duel-
list; a gentleman of the very first house, of the
first and second cause: ah, the immortal paesadol
the jmnto reverso I the Aoi/

Ben. The what?

Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! "By so
Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall man! a very
good whore! " Why, is not this a lamentable
thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted
with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers,
these perdona-mi's who stand so much on the
new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the old
bench? O, their bones, their bones!

Enter Boheo
Ben. Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo. I

Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring:
flesh, flesh, how art thou fishifiedt Now is he 40
for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in: Laura .
to his lady was a kitchen-wench; marry, she
had a better love to be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; I



Scene Fodh] ROMEO AND JULIET 47

Cleopatra a gipsy; Helen and Hero hildings and
harlots; Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the
purpose. Signior Romeo, ban jour! there 'a a
French salutation to your French slop. You gave
us the counterfeit fairly last night.

Rom. Good morrow to you both. What counter-
feit did I give you ? c

Mer. The slip, sir, the slip; can you not con-
ceive?

Rom. Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was
great; and in such a case as mine a man may
strain courtesy.

Mer. That 's as much as to say, such a case as
yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.

Rom. Meaning, to court'sy.

Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.

Rom. A most courteous exposition. «■

Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

Rom. Pink for flower.

Mer. Right.

Rom. Why, then is my pump well flowered.

Mer. Well said: follow me this jest now till
thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the
single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after
the wearing sole singular. , , ' , , / ,

iJom- O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singlelreSsl -'_'-./'' ^^

Mer. Come between us, good BenvoHo; my wits
faint.

Rom. Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or
I '11 cry a match.

Jifer. Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase,



48 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

I am done; for thou hast more of the wild-
goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have
in my whole five: was I with you there for the
goose?

Rom. Thou wast never with me for any thing
when thou wast not there for the goose. bo

Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

Rom. Nay, good goose, bite not.

Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a
mo-st sharp sauce.

Rom. And is it not well served in to a sweet
goose?

Mer. 0, here 's a wit of cheveril, that stretches
from an inch narrow to an ell broad!

Rom. I stretch it out tor that word " broad; "
which added to the goose, proves thee far and wide oo
a broad goose.

Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning
for love? now art thou sociable, now art thou
Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by art as
well as by nature: for this drivelling love is like a
great natural, that runs lolling up and down to
hide his bauble in a hole.

Ben. Stop there, stop there. ■

Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against
the hair. loo

Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale lai^e.

Mer. O, thou art deceived; I would have made
it short; for I was come to the whole depth of my
tale; and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument
no longer.

Ron. Here 's goodly gear!



Sen™ FctuB] ROMEO AND JULIET 49

Enter NtiHsc and Pxter

Mer. A sail, a sail!

Ben. Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

Nurse. Peter! ti

Peter. Anon!

Nurse. My fan, Peter.

Mer. Good Peter, to bide her face; for her fan 's
the fairer face.

Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

Mer. God ye good den, fair gMitlewoman,

Nurse. Is it good den?

Mer. T is no less, I tell you; for the bawdy
band of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.

Nurse. Out upon you! what a man are you! \t

Rom. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made
for himself to mar.

Nurse. By my troth, it is well said; " for bim-
aeU to mar," quotb 'a? Gentlemen, can any of you
tdl me where I may find the young Romeo?

Rcftn. I can tell you; but young Romeo will
be older when you have found him than he was
when you sought him: I am the youngest of that
name, for fault of a worse.

Nurse. You say well. is

Mer. Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i'
faith; wisely, wisely.

Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confi-
dence with you.

Ben. She will indite him to some supper.

Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So bo!

Bom. What hast thou found?



50 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, air, in a lenten
pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be
(jpent.* \Singa. uo

" An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar.

Is very go&lt;xi meat in lent:
But a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score.

When it hoars ere it be spent."

Eomeo, will you come to your father's? we 11 to
dinner, thither.

Rom. I will follow you.

Mer. Farewell, ancient lady; farewell, [nnging] iso
" lady, lady, lady."

[Exeunt Mercutio aitd Benvolio.

Nurse. Marrjf, fafe.w^l! I pray you, sir, what
saucy merchant ^Jae'thb, that was so full of his
ropeiyP

Rom. A gentienmn, nurse, that loves to hear
himself talk, and will speak more in a minute
than he will stand to in a month.

Nurse. An 'a speak anything ag^nst me, I '11
take him down, an 'a were lustier than be is, and
twenty such Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find i so
those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
Qirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And
thou must stand by too, and suffer every knave to
use me at his pleasure?

Peler. I saw no man use you at his pleasure; if
I had, my weapon should quickly have been out4
I warrant you: I dare draw as soon as another



Scene Fouk] ROMEO AND JULIET 51

man, if I see occasion io a good quarrel, and the
law on my side.

Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that.iTo
every part sbout me quivers. Scurvy knave!
Pray you, sir, a word; and as I told you, my
young lady bade me inquire you out; what she
bade rae say, I will keep to myself: but first let
me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fool's
paradise, as they say, it were a veiy gross kind
of behaviour, as they say: for the gentlewoman
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal
double with her, truly it were an ill thing to
be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak iso
dealing.

Rom. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mis-
tJ^s. I protest mito thee —
^furse. Good heart! and, i' faith, I will tell her
as much: Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

Rom. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost
not mark me.

Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest;
which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike ofFer. is«

Rom. Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Be shrived, and married. Here is for thy pains.

Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.

Rom. Go to; I say you shall.

Nurse. This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be
there.

Rom. And stay, good nurse; behind the abb^
wall:



52 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

Witliin this hour my man shall be viih thee, to

And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
Which to tl^ie high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell; be trusty, and I '11 quit thy piuns:
Farewell; conuuend me to thy mistress.

Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark
you, sir.

Rmn. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?

Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear
say.
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

item. I warrant thee, my man 's as true as steel. *i

Nurse. Well, sir; my mbtress is the sweetest
lady — Lord, Lord! when 't was a little prating
thing : — O, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris,
that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
Boul, had as ,lief see a toad, a very toad, as see
him. I anger her sometimes and tell her that
Paris is the properer man; but, I 'li warrant you,
when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in
the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo
begin both with a letter? tt

Rom. Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.

NvTse. Ah, mocker, that 's the dog's name; R
is for the — No; I know it begins with some
other letter: — and she hath the prettiest sententious
of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you
good to hear it.

Rom. Commend me to thy lady.

Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Rom^o.]
Peter! ta



Sen™ Five] ROMEO AND JULIET 53

Pet. Aooot

Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and
apace. [Exeunt.

ScBNB V — Capakt't orchard Jk

Enter Juliet (

Jul. The clock struck nine when I did send the J
nurse; "r

In half an hour she promised to return. V

Percliance she cannot meet him: that 's not so. "4^^
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts, ' ^
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams, ■, ^
Driving back shadows over louring hills: ^

Therefore do nimble-pinion 'd doves draw love, ?[|^

And therefore hath the i^-ind-swift Cupid wings. ^
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill -^

Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve lo

Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood.
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love.
And his to me: -

But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
O God, she comes!
I EtUer Nurse and Pkter

j O honey nurse, what news?

Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit Peter, lo

Jul. Now, good sweet nurse, — O Lord, why
look'st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;



54 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

If good, thou shameat the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with ao sour a face.

Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile:
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaiint have I had!

Jill. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy
news.
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse,
speak.

Nurse. Jesu, what haste? can you not stay
awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath? si

Jul. How art thou out of breath, when thou
bast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in thb delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Say either, and I '11 stay the circumstance:
Let me be satisfied, is 't good or bad?

Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice;
you know not how to choose a man: Romeo! no,
not he; though his face be better than any man's, «&lt;
yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand, and a
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talked
on, yet they are past compare: he is not the
flower of courtesy, but, I '11 warrant him, as gentle
as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve Glod.
What, have you dined at home?

Jid. No, no: but all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? what of that?

Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! what a head
have I!



ScDiE Fin] ROMEO AND JULIET 55

It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. a

My back o' t' other side, — O, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about.
To catch my death with jaunting up and down!

Jid. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my
love?

Nurse. Your love says like an honest gentleman,
and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and,
I warrant, a virtuous, — Where is your mother?

Jul. Where is my mother! why, she is within; a
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
" Your love says like an honest gentleman.
Where is your mother? "

Nurse. O, God's lady dearl

Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

Jul. Here 's such a coil ! come, what - says
Romeo?

Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-
day?

Jul. 1 have.

Nurse, Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence'
cell; T

There stays a husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeksi
They '11 be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church; I must another way.
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon, when it is dark:
I am the drudge and toil in your delight.



56 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go; I 'U to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Jul, Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, fate-
well. [Exeunt, so



Scene VI — Friar Laurence's cell
Enter Friar Laurence and Romeo

Fri. L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act.
That after hours with sorrow chide us not !

Rom. Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words.
Then love-devouring death do what he dare;

-It is enough I may but call her mine.

Fri. L. These violent, delights have violent ends

^And in their triumph die, like fire and powder, i

Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite;
Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;

^ Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

EtUer Juliet

Here comes the lady: 0, so hght a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everiaating fiint:
A lover may bestride the gossamer
That idles in the wanton summer aii.
And yet not fall; so light is vanity. i
Jul, Good even to my ghostly confessor.
CuKyl.'



Scene Six] KOMEO AND JULIET 57

Fri. L. Romeo shaL thank thee, daughter, tar us
both.

ifuZ. As much to him, else is his thanks too
much.

Rom. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped Uke mine and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

Jvl. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words, t
Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

Fri. L. Come, come with me, and we will make
short work;
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one. {Exeunt.



..n,™,, Google



Scene I — A public place
Enter Mercutio, Bbntolio, Page, and Servants

Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let 's retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

Mer. Thou art like one of those fellows that
when he enters the confines of a tavern claps me
his sword upon the table and says " God send me no
need of thee!" and by the operation of the second
cup draws It on the drawer, when indeed there is
no need. lo

Ben. Am I like such a fellow? ^

Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in th^
mood, as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be
moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

Ben. And what to?

Mer. Nay, an there were two su'h, we should
have none shortly, for one would kill the other.
Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that
hath a hair more, or a hair less, in his beard, than
thou hast: thou wilt quarrel with a man for to
cracking nuts, having no other reason but be-
cause thou hast hazel eyes: what eye but such
an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy
head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of



Scene One] ROMEO AND JULIET 59

meat, and yet thy head hath been lieaten as
addle as an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quar-
relled with a man for coughing in the street,
because he hath wakened thy dog that hath Iain
asleep in the sun: didst thou not fall out with a
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? so
with another,for tying his new shoes with old riband?
and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarrelling!

Bcti, An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art,
any man should buy the fee-simple of my lite for
an hour and a quarter.

Mer. The fee-simple! O simple!

Ben. By my head, here come the Capuleta.

Mer. By my heel, I care not.

Enter Tybalt and others

Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to

them. io

Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.

Mer. And but one word with one of us? couple
it with something; make it a word and a blow.

Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir,
an you will give me occasion.

Mer, Could you not take some occasion without
giving?

Tyb. Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo, —

Mer. Consort! what, dost thou make us min-
strels? an thou make minstrels of us, look to hear so
nothing but discords: here 's my fiddlestick; here 's
that shall make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!

Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,



60 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thbeb

And reason coldly of your grievances.
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

Mer. Afea^^es. wece-made to look,-aitd let
them gaze;
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

Enter Romeo

Tyh. Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes
my man.

Mer. But I '11 be hang'd, sir, if he wear your
livery : «

Marry, go before to field, he '11 be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him " man."

Tyb. Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
No better term than this, — thou art a villain. '

Rom. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love
thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.

Tyh. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and
draw. •

Rom. I do protest. I never injured thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise.
Till thou shall know the reason of my love:
And so, good Capulet, — which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, — be satisfied.

Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Alia sloccata carries it away. [Dravsa.

Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?



ScehkOke] ROMEO AND JULIET 6l

Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?

Mer. Good kmg of cats, nothing but one of your no
nine lives; that I mean to make hold withal, and,
as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of
the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his
pilcher by the ears? make haste, lest mine be
about your ears ere it be out.

Tyb. I am for you. [Dravring.

Rom. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

Mer. Come, sir, your passado. [They fight.

Rom.. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage ! so

Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets :
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!

[Tybalt under Romeo's arm etabs Mercutio,
and fiies vntk his followers.

Mer. I am hurt,

A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?

Ben. What, art thou hurt?

Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis
enough.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.

lEint Page.

Rom. Courage, maa; the hurt cannot be much.

Mer. No, 't b not so deep as a well, nor so
wide as a church-door; but 't is enough, 't will igo
serve: ask for me to-morrow, and you shall find
me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for
this world. A plague o' both Jfour houses!
'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch



62 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Tbieb

a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a vill^,
that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the
devil came you between us? I was hurt under
your arm.

Rom. I thought all for the best.

Mer. llelp me into some house, Benvolio, u

1 Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!



They have made worms' meat of me: I have it.
And soundly too: your houses!

[Exeunt Mercutio and Benvfdto.

R&amp;m, This gentleman, tlie prince's near ally.
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation staiu'd
With Tybalt's slander, — Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften'd- valour's steel! mo

Re-ealer Benvolio

Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio 's dead !
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did sconi the earth.

Rom,. This day's black fate on more days doth
depend;
This but begins the woe others must end.

Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again, iso

Rom. Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slmn!
Away to heaven, respective lenity.
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!

Rc-ailer Tybalt
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again.
That late thou gavest me; (or Mercutio'a soul



Scnra 0«e1 ROMEO AND JUUET fit

Is but a little way above our heads.
Staying for thine to keep him compai^:
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.

Tyb, Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him
here,
Shalt with him hence.

Rom. This shall determine that.

[They fight; TybaU falls.

Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee

death.
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away! 11

Rom. 0, I am fortune's fool!

Ben. Why dost thou stay? [Exit Romeo.

Enter Citizens, &amp;c.

First Cit. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

Ben. There lies that Tybalt.

First Cit. Up, sir, go with me;

I charge thee in the prince's name, obey.

Enter Prince, attended ; Montaoue, Capulet, their
Wives, and others

Prin. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

Ben. O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio. w

La. Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's
child!



6* ROMEO AND JULIET [Ac-ZTmreb

O prince! O cousin! husband! 0, the blood is'^ilt
Ot my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true.
For blood of ouis, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!

Prin. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did

slay;
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high dbpleasure: all this, uttered i«

With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly

bow'd.
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast.
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point.
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
"Hold, friends! friends, part! " and, swifter than

his tongue, it

His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twist them rushes; underneath whose arm
. An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge.
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
And as he fell, did Romeo tura and fiy.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die. i!



SciweTwo] ROMEO AND JULIET 65

La. Cap. He b a kiiuman to the Montague;
Affection makes hJm false; he speaks not true:
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

Priti. Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

Mon. Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio 's friend ;
His fault concludes but what the law should end, ii
Tbe hfe of Tybalt.

Prin. And for that offence

Immediately we do exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I '11 amerce you with so strong a fine
That you-shall all repent the loss of mine:
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears, nor prayers, shall purchase out abuses:
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
£lse, when he 's found, that hour is his last. ti

Bear hence this body and attend our will;
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

•j^ [ExeurU.

^•^Jvl. Gall



' Scene II — Capuht's orchard
Enter Juliet



* Jtd. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phcebus' lodging: such a waggoner
As Phaethon would whip you to the west.
And bring in cloudy night immediately.



66 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Tm«

Spread thy close curtain, love-p«Ioniuiig night.
That runaways' eyes may TFtiik, and Homeo
Leap to these arms, tmtalk'd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night, la

Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
I And leam me how to lose a winning match.
Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my che^s.
With thy black mantle; till strange love, grows

bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night; come, Borneo; come, thou day in

night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd

night, ti

Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die.
Take him and cut him out in little stars.
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in Ijve with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love.
But not possess 'd it, and, though I am sold.
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes a

And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse.
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly ehi^fi^^.



ScmeTwo] EOMEO and JULIET 67

Enter Nurse, miik cordi

Now, nurse, what oewsP What hast thou there?

the cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords.

[Thrmos them down.

Jid. Ay me! what uews? why dost thou wring
thy hands?

Nurse. Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead,
he *s dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undoae! —
Alack the day! he 's gone, he 's kill'd, he 's dead!

Jul. Can Heaven be so envious?

Nurse. Romeo can, 4i

Though Heaven cannot: O, Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

Jvl. What devil art thou, that dost torment me
thus?
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but ' /,'
And that bare vowel " / " shall pobon more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
I am not I, if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer, " /."
If he be slain, say " / "; or if not, no: «i

Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes, —
God save the mark! — here on his manly breast:
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood.
All in gore blood; I swounded at the sight.

L;oogic



68 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Three

Jid. O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break
at once!
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty !
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier! s

NuTse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had !
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

Jvl. What storm is this that blows so con-
trary?
Is Bomeo slaughter'd? and is Tybalt dead?
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
For who is living, if those two are gone?

NuTse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo, that kill'd him, he is banished. :

Jul. God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's
blood?

Nurse. It did, it did; alas the day, it did!

Jid. O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell, i

When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? 0, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous pa'ace!



ScEMB Two] ROMEO AND JULIET 6»

Nurse. There 'a no trust,

No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah! where 's my man? give me some agwa pifee:
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me

old.
Shame come to Romeo!

Jul. Blister'd be thy tongue t

For such a wish! he was not bom to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For 't is a throne where honour may be crown'd
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

Nurse. - Will you speak well of him that Itill'd
your cousin?

Jid. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy

When I, thy three-hours' wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? i«
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you mistaking offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slam;
And Tybalt 's dead, that would have slain my

husband:
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death.
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
But, O, it presses to my memory, u

lake damned guilty deeds to sinners' minda: ,



TO EOMEO AND JULIET [Act Tmue

"TybaJt is dead, and Romeo — banished; "

That 'banishM,' that one word "banished,"

Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death

Was woe enough, if it had ended there;'

Or, if aour woe delights in fellowship

And needly will be rank'd with other griefs.

Why follow'd not, when she said "Tybalt 's dead,"

Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,

Which modem lamentation might have moved? i*

But, with a rearward following Tybalt's death,

"Borneo is banished," to speak that word,

Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,

All slain, all dead. "Romeo is banished!"

There is no end, do limit, measure, bound.

In that word 's death; no words can that woe sound.

Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?

NtiTse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

Jvl. Wash they his wounds with tears: mine
shall be spent, la

When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those cords; poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled;
He made you for a highway to my bed;
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords, come, nurse; I 'U to my wedding

bed;
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

Nurse. Hie to your chamber iT^^tt-ftfiTfiomeo
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night : !■

1 '11 to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.



Sc»«Th«ee] ROMEO AND JULIET 71

Jvl. O, find him! give this ring to my true
knight.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

Scene III — Tnar Laureac^t cell
Enter Friar Laurence

Fri. L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou
fearful man:
AfiSiction is eoamour'd of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.

EiUer Romeo

Rom. Father, what news? what is the prince's
doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand.
That I yet know not?

FH. L. Too familiar

Is my dear son with such sour company:
I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.

Rmn. What less than dooms-day is the prince's
doom?

Fri. L. A gentler judgment vaniah'd from his lips, i
Not body's death, but body's banishment.

Rom. H&amp;ibanishment! bemerciful, say "death; "
For exile hath more terror in his look.
Much more, than death: do not say " banishment."

Fri. L. Here from Verona art thou banbhed:
Be patient, for the world ia broad and wide.

Rom. There is no world without Verona wallSi
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.



72 - , ROMEO AND JULIET {Act Tbreb

Hence — banishM is bamsh'd from the world.
And world's exile is death: then banished i

Is death mis-term 'd: calling death banishment.
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me,

Fri. L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankf ulness !
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince.
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law.
And tum'd that black word death to banishment:
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

/loTTi. T is torture, and not mercy: heaven is
here.
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog i

And little mouse, every unworthy thing.
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
But Romeo may not: more validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion-flies than Romeo: they may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips.
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty.
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished: t

Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
They are free men, but I am banished:
And aay'st thou yet, that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground

knife.
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean.
But "banished" to kill meP — "banished"?
friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Bowlings attend it: how hast thou the heart.



ScEKE TsEEE] ROMEO AND JULIET 73

Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A ain-absolver, and my friend profess'd, i

To mangle me with that word "banished"?
Fri. L. Thou fond mad man, hear me but spealc

a word.
Rom. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Fri. L. I '11 give thee armour to keep off that
word;
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

Ram. Yet "banished"? Hang up philosophy!

Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,

Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom.

It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more. t

Fri. L. O. then I see that madmen have no ears.

Rom. How should they, when that wise men

have no eyes?
Fri. L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Ram. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost
not feel:
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love.
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered.
Doting like me and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear

thy hair.
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave. i

[Knocking within.
Fri. L. Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide

thyself.
Bom. Not I; unless the breath of heart-sick
groans.



14 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thhm

Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.

[Knocking.
Fri. L. Hark, how they knock! Who '3 there?
Romeo, arise;
Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;

[Knocking.
Bmi to my study. By and by. God'a will.
What simpleness is this! I come, I come!

[Knocking.
Who knocks so hard? whence come youP what 's
your will?
NuT8e. \Within.] Let me come in, and you shall
know my errand;
I come from Lady Juliet.
Fri. L. Welcome then. s



Enter Nurse

Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where is my lady's lord? where 's Romeo?
Fri. L. There on the ground, with his own

tears made drunk.
Nurse. ! he is even in my mistress' cose.
Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
■ Piteous predicament! Even so lies she.
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, .stand up; stand, an you be a man:
For Juliet's sake, tor her sake, rise and stand;
Why should you fall into so deep an O? t

Rom. Nurse !

Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death 's the end
of all.



ScBJC Thbee] ROMEO AND JULIET 75

Rom. ^akest thou of Juliet? how is it with
her?
Doth she not think me an old murderer.
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Wbere is she? and how doth she? and what says
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?

Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and
weeps;
And now falls on her bed; and then starts up, i:

And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries.
And then down falls again.

Ram. As if that name.

Shot from the deadly level of a gun.
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Murder'd her kinsman. 0, tell me, friar, tell me.
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion. [DramiTig kia Kusrrd.

Fti. L. Hold thy desperate hand:

Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote ii

The unreasonable fury of a beast:
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amaaed me: by my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady too that lives in thee.
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and
earth?



re ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thut

Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet we
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shatnest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all.
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy. shape, thy love, thy wit:
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury.
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love, is«

Mis-shapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Is set a-fire by thine own ignorance.
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew'st Tybalt; there art thou happy too:
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy fiiend
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy: ut

A pack of blessings lights upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench.
Thou pout'st upon thy fortime and thy love:
. Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
But look thou stay not till the watch be set.
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Whf re thou shalt live, till we can find a time ut

To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,.



ScEME PourJ ROMEO AND JULIET 77

Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
Romeo b coming.

Nurse. Lord, I could have stay'd here all the
night
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is! ii

My lord, I '11 tell my lady you will come.

Rom. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

Nurse. Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. [Exit,

Bam. How well my comfort is revived by this!

Fri. L. Go hence; good night; and here stands
all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set.
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
Sojourn in Mantua; I '11 find out your man.
And he shall signify from time to time I7

Every good hap to you that chances here:
Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; goodnight.

Rom. But that a joy past joy calls out on me.
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee:
Farewdl. [Exeunt.

ScENB IV — A room in Capulet's house
Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet. and Paris

Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
Tlyit we have had no time to move our daughter:



78 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act The™

Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly.
And so did I : — well, we were bom to die.
'T is very late, she '11 not come down to-night:
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.

Par. These times of woe afford no time to woo.
Madam, good night : commend me to youi daughter.

La. Cap. I will, and know her mind early to-
morrow;,! ,, .,;' ,','J II
To-night she is ftleWd up to he^ heaviness.

Cap. Sir Paris, I will make' a desperate tender
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next —
But, soft! what day is this?

Par. Monday, my lord.

Cap. Monday! ha! ha! A'ell, Wednesday is
too soon,
0' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her, n

She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
We '11 keep no great ado, — a friend or two;
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late.
It may be thought we held him carelessly.
Being our kinsman; if we revel much: _
Therefore we '11 have some half a dozen friends.
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

Par. My lord, I would that Thursday were to-
morrow.

Cap. Well, get you gone : o' Thursday be it, th.^n. s



ScdfE Pivi] ROMEO AND JULIET 79

Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed.

Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.

Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!

Afore me! it is so very very late.

That we may call it early by and by.

Good night. [Exeunt.

Scene V — Capulet's orchard
Enter Romeo and Juliet above, at the mndore

Jul. Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

Rom. It was the lark, the herald of the morn, i
No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks/
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east: ^_fl
Night's candles are burnt out. and jocund day K
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tomj^^s^-^ !
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

Jul. Yon light is not daylight, I know it, I:
It is some meteor that the sun exhales.
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.

Rom. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
I am content, so thou wilt have it so,
I '11 say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'T is but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow; i

Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
THe vaulty heaven so high above our heads:



80 BOMEO AND JULIET [Act Three

I have more care to stay than will to go :
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
How is 't, my soul? let 's talk; it is not day.

Jul. It is, it is; hie hence, begone, away I
It is the lark that sings so out of tune.
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
J Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us: so

Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes;
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray.
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day.
O, now be gone; more light and light it grows. »

Rom. More light and light: more dark and dark
our. woes!

Enter Nurse, to the chamber
Nurse. Madam!
Jul. Nurse?

Nurse. Your lady mother b coming to your
chamber :
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit, to

Jul. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Bom. Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I '11
descend. [He goelh doton.

Jid. Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband,
friend !
I must hear from thee every day in the hour.
For in a minute there are many days:
O, by this count I shall be much in years.
Ere I again behold my Komeo I

Rom. Farewell ! .



ScB« Five] R0ME» AND JULIET . 81

I will omit no opportunity

That may convey my greetings, love, to thee, to

J id. O, think'st thou, we shall ever meet i^ainP

Rom. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall
serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

Jvl. O God! I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below.
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.

Rom. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu! adieu!

[ExU.

Jvl. fortune, fortune! tdl men call thee fickle: «o
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, (©rtune;
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep bim long,
But send him back.

La. Cap. [Witkin.] Ho, daughter, are you upp

Jul. Who is 't that calls? is it my lady mothec?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
^Tiat unaecustom'd cause procures her hither?

Ealer Ladv Capulet
La. Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?
Jid. Madam, I am not well.

La. Cap. Evermore weeping for your cousin's

death? TO

What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with

tears?
And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him
live;



88 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thrzb

Therefore, liave done: some grief shows much of

love;
But much of grief shows still some want of wit,
Jvl. Yet let nie weep for such a feeling loss.
. La. (Jap. So shall you feel the loss but not the
,' friend

■' Which you weep for.
! Jvl. Feeling so the loss,

V J.eamuitchoose but ever weep the friend.

La. Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much
for his death.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him. si

Jul. What villain, madam?
La. Cap. That same vill^n, Romeo.

J id. [Aside.] Villain and he be many miles
asunder. —
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
La. Cap. That is, because the traitor murderer

lives.
Jid. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my
hands:
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death !
La. Cap. We will have vengeance for it, fear
thou not:
Then weep no more. I '11 send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished runagate doth live, fli

Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram.
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
Jul. Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
' With Romeo, till I behold him — dead —



Scene Five] BOMEO AND JULIET 83

Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vexed:

Madam, if you could find out but a man

To bear a poison, I would temper it;

That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof.

Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors it

To hear him named, and cannot come to him.

To wreak the love I bore my cousin

Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him!

La. Cap. Find thou the means, and I '11 find
such a man.
But now I '11 tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

Jul. And joy comes well in such a needy time,
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

La. Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father,
chUd;
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness.
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy, ii

That thou expect 'st not nor I looked not for.

Jul. Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

io. Cap. Marry, my child, early next Thursday
mom.
The gallant, young and noble gentleman.
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

Jul. Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride,
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
Ere be, that should be husband, comes to woo. is
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Bather than Paris. These are news indeed!



84 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Jh bee

La. Cap. Here comes your father; tell him so

yourself, I

And see how he will take it at your hands. |

Cap. When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle !
dew;
But for the sunset of my brother's son, i

It rains downright. '

How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears? ui
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou comiterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind; |

For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea, .

Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is.
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs; '

Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them.
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?

La. Cap. Ay, sir; but she will none, she ^ves
you thanks.
I would the fooWese married to ho^^avs!/ v

Cap. Soft ! tate (me Vith y
wife.
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
I Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest.
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

Jtd. Not proud, you have; but thankful, that
you have:
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for bate, that is meant love.




ScEKE Five] ROMEO AND JULIET 85

Cap. ,How now, how now, chop-logic! What is

\this? ij

" Proud," and ' I thank you," and " I thank you

not; "
And yet " not proud: " mistress minion, you.
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next.
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-aicknesa carrion! out, you baggage!
You ta llow-face !

LoTCap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?

Jid. Good father, I beseech you on my knees.
Hear me with patience but to speak a word. i«

Cnp. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient
wretch!
r.' I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
S (fc. n ever after look me in the face:

Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;

My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest '

That God had lent us but this only child;

But now I see this one is one too much.

And that we have a curse in having her:

Out on her, hilding!

Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so. it

Cap. And why, my lady wisdom? hold your
tongue.
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

Nurse. I speak no treason.

Cap. 0, God ye god-den.

Nurse. May not one speak?



86 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thm

Cap. Peacej you mumbling fool!

Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
For here we need it not.

La. Cap. You are too hot.

Cap. God's bread! it makes me mad:
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play.
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match 'd; and having now provided w
A. gentleman of noble parentage.
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train 'd,
Stufit'd, as they say, with honourable parts.
Proportion 'd as one's thought would wish a man;
And then to have a wretched pulipgffoQl, -f^ ^ ,•
A whining mammet in her fortffi^'^lender.
To answer " I '11 not wed; I cannot love,
I am too young; I pray you, pardon me."
But, an you will not wed, I '11 pardon you:
Graze where you will, you shall not house with

me: w

Look to 't, think on 't, I do not use to jest,
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
An you be mine, I '11 give you to my friend;
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I '11 ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
■ Trust to 't, bethink you: I '11 not be forsworn. [ExU.

Jul. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds.
That sees into the bottom of my grief.'
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away ! m

Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.



ScEwiFiTE] ROMEO AND JULIET &amp;7

La. Cap. Talk not to me, for I '11 not speak a
word:
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. [Exit.

Jvl. God! — nurse, how shall this be pre-
vented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
How shall that faith return again to earth.
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me. «(

Alack, alack, that Heaven should practise strata-
gems
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse. . ^ ''

Nurse. Faith, here it is. ' '

Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to notiiing.
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth, / '

Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the county.
O, he 's a lovely gentleman ! m

Romeo 's a dishclout to himt an eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match.
For it excels your first: or if it did not.
Your first is dead ; or 't were as good he were.
As living here and you no use of him.

Jid. Speakest thou from thy heart?

Nurse. And from my soul too;

Or else beshrew them both.

Jvl. Amen!



88 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Tasn

NuTse. What?

Jul. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellons
much.
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone, M

Having dbpleased my father, to Laiirence' cell
To make confession and to be absolved.

Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.
[ExU.

Jul. Ancient dunnation! most wicked fiand!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn.
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twmn. w
I '11 to the friar, to know his remedy :
If all ebe fail, myself have power to die. [Exit.



■,,GoogIc



ACT IV

ScBNi I — FTiar Laurence' t ceU
EiUer Friar Laurbncb and Paris

Fri. L. On Thursday, sir? the time ia very short.

Par. My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

Fri. L. Yousay youdonotknowthelady'smind:
Uneven is the course, I hke it not.

Par, launoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir. her father counts it dangerous
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway, la

And in his wisdom hastes our marriage.
To stop the inundation of her tears;
Which, too much minded by herself alone.
May be put from her by society :
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

Fri. L. [A»ide.] I would' I knew not why it
should be slow'd.
Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell.

Enler Juuet
Par. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Jtd. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Par. That may be, must be, love, on Thursday

next. so

Jul. What must be shall be.

" „,„.. Google



90 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Foe.

Fri. L. That 's a certain text.

Par. Come you to make confession to this

father?
Jul. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Par. Do not deny to him that you love me,
Jul. I will confess to you that I love him.
Par. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Jul. If I do so, it will be of more price, :

Being spoke behind your back, than to yoiir face.
Par, Poor soul, thy face b much abused with

tears. I

Jtd. The tears have got small victory by that; m|
For it was bad enough before their spite.

Par. Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with I

that report.
Jid. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth; i
And what I spake, I spake it to my face. |

Par. Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd i

it.
Jul. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

Fri. L. My leisiu-e serves me, pensive daughter,
now.
'- My lord, we must entreat the time alone. »

Par. God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.
Jul. O, shut the door ! and when thou hast done
so.
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past
help!



Sce«eO«] ROMEO AND JULIET 91

Fri. L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this county,

Jul. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this, so
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help.
Do thou but call my resolution wise.
And with this knife I 'U help it presently.
God joined my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both;
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time, &lt;o

Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
"Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak; I long to die.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

Fri.L. Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope.
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent. to

If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That copest with death himself to scape from it;
And, if thou darest, I '11 give thee remedy.

Jtd. 0, hid me leap, rather than marry Paris,



98 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fou»

From off the battlements ot yonder tower;

Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk

Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears; (

Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,

O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,

With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;

Or bid me go into a new-made grave

And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;

Things that, to hear them told, have made me

tremble;
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
Fri.L. Hold, then; go home, be merry, give

consent
To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow; (

To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
Take thou this vial, being then in bed.
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall, ic

Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
Each part, deprived of supple government.
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours.
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes



Scene Two] BOMEO AND JULIET 93

To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:

Then, ss the maimer of our country ia.

In thy best robes uncovered on the bier ii

Thou shalt he borne to that same ancient vault

Where all the kindred of the Capnlets he.

In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,

Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift.

And hither shall he come: and he and I

Will watch thy waking, and that very night

Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.

And this shall free thee from this present shame;

If no unconstant toy, nor womanish fear.

Abate thy valour in the acting it. it

Jvl. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

Ffi. L. Hold; get you gone, be strong and pros-
perous
In this resolve: I '11 send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

Jvl. Love give me strength! and strength shall
help afford.
Farewell, dear father! {Exeunt.

Scene II — HiUl m Capuleft house

Enter Capulkt, Lady Capulet, Nurse, ajtd two
Servingmen

Ca'p. So many guests invite as here are writ.

{ExU First Servant.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

Sec. Serv. You shall have none ill, sir; for I '11
try if they can lick their fingers.

Cap, How canst thou try them so?



9* ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Foto

See. Serv. Marry, sir, 't is an ill cook that cannot
lick his own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick
his fingers goes not with me.

Cap. Go, be gone. [Exit Sec. Servant.

We shall be much unfumish'd for this time. i

What, b my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

Nurse. Ay, forsooth.

Cap. Well, he may chance to do some good on
her:
A peevish self-wiH'd harlotry it is.

Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with
merry look.

Enlar Jdljct

Cap. How now, my headstrong! where have you

been gadding?
Jul. Where I have leam'd me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
By holy Laurence to tall prostrate here, i

To beg your pardon : pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

Cap. Send for the county; go tell him of this:
1 I "11 have this knot Icnit up to-morrow morning.
/ Jut. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
I And gave him what becomed love I might,



Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

Cap. Why, I am glad on 't; this is well: stand
up: \

This is as 't should be. Let me see the coimty;
Ay. maiTy, go, I say, and fetch him hither.



ScwE Th»ee1 ROMEO AND JULIET 95

Now, afore God! this reverend holy trior.
All our whole city is much bound to him.

Jvl. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet.
To help me sort such needful ornameats
As you think fit to fumbh me to-morrow?

La. Cap. No, not till Thursday; there is time '
enough.

Cop. Go, nurse, go with her: we 'U to church
to-morrow. [Exeunt JvliH and NuTie.

La. Cap. We shall be short in our provision:
'T is now near night.

Cap, Tush, I will stir about.

And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife: i
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
I '11 not to bed to-night; let me alone;
I 'U play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
They are all forth. Well, 1 will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against to-morrow; my heart is wondrous light.
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

[Exeunt.

Stene III — yWtei'* chamber

Enter Juliet and Nurse

Jvl. Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle

I pray thee, leave me to myself to-night;

For I have need oC many orisons

To move the heavens to smile upon my state.

Which, well thou know'st, is cross and full of sin.



.96 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fot« '

Enter Lady Capulbt |

La. Cap. What, are you busy, ho? need you my i

help? I

Jjd. No, madam; we have cull'd such neces- I

As are behovetul for our state to-monbw:

So please you, let me now be left alone,

And let the nurse this night sit up with you; i

For, I am sure, you have your hands full all.

In this so sudden business.

Im. Cap. Good night:

Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.

[Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurst.

Jul. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet
again.
I have 8 faint cold fear thrills through my veins.
That almost freezes up the heat of hfe:
I '11 call them back again to comfort me:
Nurse! What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial. , «

What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
No, no; this shall forbid it: lie thou there.

[Laying down her dagger.
What if it be a poison, which the friar
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be disbonour'd.
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not, .
Por he hath still been tried a holy man.



ScENBTaaEE] ROMEO AND JULIET 97

How if, when I am laid into the tomb. i

I wake before the time that Romeo

Come to redeem me? there 's a^fearful point!

Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,

To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,

And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?

Or, if I live, is it not very like.

The horrible conceit of death and night.

Together with the terror of the place, —

As in a vault, an ancient receptacle.

Where, for these many hundred years, the bones i

Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd:

Where bloody TVbalt, yet but green in earth.

Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say.

At some hours in the night spirits resort; —

Alack, alack, is it not like that I,

So early waking, what with loathsome smells.

And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth.

That living mortals, hearing them, run mad: —

O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,

Environed with all these hideous fears? i

And madly play with my forefathers' joints?

And pluck the mangled Tybalt from hb shroud?

And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone.

As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?

0, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost

Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body

Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!

Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

[She faUa upon her bed, within the curtatnt.



98 ROMEO AND JULIET {Act Fomi

ScKNB IV — Hall in Capulel't /urnse

Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse
La. Cap. Hold, take these keya, and fetch more

spices, nurse.
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the
pastry.

Enter Capulet
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath
crow'd.
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
Look to the baked meats, good Angehca:
Spare not for cost.

Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,

Get you to bed; faith, you '11 be sick to-morrow
For this night's watching.

Cap. No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd
ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick. i

La. Cap. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in
your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.

[ExeuTit Lady Capvlet and Nurse.
Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!

Eater three or four Servingmen, with tpits, logs, and
baskets

Now, fellow,
VFhat 's there?

First Serv. Things for the cook, sir; but I know
not what.



ScBKE Five] ROMEO AND JULIET 99

Cap. Make haate, make haste. [ExU First Sen.]
Sirrah, fetch drier loga:
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

Sec. Sen. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs.
And never trouble Peter for the matter. [Exit.
Cap. Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson,
ha!
Thou shall be logger-head. Good faith, 't is day: m
The county will be here with music straight.
For so he said he would: I hear him near.

[Mime mtkin.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!

Re-enter Nurse

Go, waken Juliet, go, and trim her up;
I 'U go and chat with Paris : hie, make haste,
ftfake haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
Make haste, I say. [Exeunt,

Scene V — Juliet'* chmnber
Enter Nurse

Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress ! Juliet! fast, I

warrant her, she:
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why,

bride!
Wliat, not a word? you take your pennyworths

now;
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me, -



100 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Foo«

Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam! '
Ay, let the county take you in your bed; » ■,

He 'U fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?

[Undraws the cwiaim.
What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down

again I
I must needs wake you: Lady! lady! lady!
Alas, alas!. Help, help! my lady 's dead! I

O, well-a-day, that ever I was bom! !

Some aqua viUe, ho! My lord! my lady!

Enter Lady Capulkt I

La. Cap. What noise is here?

Nurte. O lamentable day!

La. Cap. What is the matter? I

Nurse. Look, look! heavy day!

La. Cap. O mel O me! my child, my only life.

Revive, look up, or I will die with thee! lo

Help, help! Call help.

Enter Capulbt
Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord

Nurse. She 's dead, deceased, she 's dead; alack

the day !
La. Cap. Alack the day, she 'a dead, she 's dead,

she 's dead!
Cap. Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she 's cold;
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Life and these hps have long been separated:



ScEHi Five] ROMEO AND JULIET 101

DeatJi lies oa her like an untimely frost

Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Nurse. O lamentable day!

La. Cap. O woful timet t

Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make
me wail.

Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

Etiter Friar Laurence and Paris, wiih Musicians

Fri. L. Come, is the bride ready to go to chmvh?

Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
O son ! the night before thy wedding-day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies.
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded: I wilt die,
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's. t

Par. Have I thought long to see this mormng's
face.
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

La. Cap. Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful ,
day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child.
But one thing to rejoice and solace in.
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!

Nurse. woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day, &gt;'

That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day! O day! day! O hateful day! /

Never was seen so black a day as this: /



lOa ROMEO AND JULIET [Aci Foot

O woful day, O woful day!

Par. Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, sliunt
Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!

Cap. Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'dt
kill'd:
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now *

To murder, murder our solemnity?
child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
And with my child my joys are buried.

Fri. L. Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure
lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this izii maid; now heaven hath all.
And all the better is it for the maid:
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life. «

The most you sought was her promotion;
For 't was your heaven she should be advanced:
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
She 's not well married that lives married long;
But she '9 best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse; and, as the custom is, 6

In all her. best array bear her to church:
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
X'^t nature's tears are reason's merriment.



Scene Five] ROMEO AND JULIET 103

Cap. All things that we ordained festival.
Turn from their office to black funeral;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Oiu" wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And ^1 things change them to the contrary. m

Fri. L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with
him;
And go. Sir Paris; every one prepare
To follow thb fair corae unto her grave:
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.

[Exeunt Capulet, Lady Capulet, Paris,

and Friar.

First Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes, and

be gone.
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up;
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case. [Exit.
First Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be loo
amended.

Enter PiCTER

Pet. Mus'cians, O, musicians I "Heart's ease,
Heart's ease: " O, an you will have me live, play
** Heart's ease."

First Mus. Why " Heart's ease " ?

Pei. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays
*' My heart is full of woe : " O, play me some merry
dump, to comfort me.

First Mus. Not a dump we: 't is no time to play
now. 110



104 ROMEO AND JULIET [Acr Pom

Pet. You will not, then?

First Mus. No.

Pet. I will then give it you soundly.

First Mus. What will you give us?

Pet. No money, on my faith, but the gleek; I
will give you the minstrel.

FirH Mus. Then will I give you the serving-
creature.

Pet. Then will I lay the serving-creature's
dagger on your pate. I will carry no crotchets: m
I 'II re you, I '11 /a you; do you note me?

First Mus. An you re us and /a us, you note us.

Sec. Mus. Pray you, put up your dagger, and
put out your wit.

Pet. Then have at you with my wit! I will
dry-beat you with an iron wit, and put up my iron
dagger. Answer me like men:

" When griping grief the heart doth wound.
And dolejvl dumps the mind oppress.
Then mitsic with her sileeT sound " — i»

Why, " silver sound "? why " music with her silver
sound " ? What say you, Simon Catling?

First Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet
sound.

Prf. Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

See. Mus. I say " silver sound," because musi-
cians sound for silver.

Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Sound-
post?

Third Mus. 'F^th, I know not what to say. »'

Pet. O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I



Scmi FwE] ROMEO AND JULIET 105

will say for you. It is " music with her silver
sound," because musicians have no gold for sound
" Tk^n mime vnih her silver sound

With speedy kelp doth lertd redress."

[Exit.
First Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same!
Sec. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we '11 in here;
tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner. [Exeunt.



,,Goo^le



ACT V

Scene I — Mantua. A Street

Enter Romeo

Rom. If I may trust the flattering trutli of sleep,
My dreanLS presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all thb day an unaceustom'd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead —
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to

think! —
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips.
That I revived, and was an emperor.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd, i»

When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!

Enter Balthasar, booted
News from Verona! — How now, Balthasar!
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.

Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument.
And her immortal part with angels lives.
\ saw her laid low in her kindred's vault, '•



Scb™ Owe] ROMEO AND JULIET 107

And presently took post to tell it you:
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

Rom. Is it even so? then, I defy you, stars!
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper.
And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.

Bal. I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.

Rom. Tush, thou art deceived:

Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do. g

Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

Bal. No, my good lord.

Rom. No matter: get thee gone.

And hire those horses; I 'U be with thee straight.

[Exit Baltkasar
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Let 's see for means: mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
I do remember an apothecary, —
And hereabouts he dwells, — which late I noted
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks, 4

Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung.
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes.
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds.
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses.
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said



108 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fira

" An if a man did need a poison now, to

Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
And this same needy man must sell it me.
1 As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
What, ho! apothecary!

Enter Apothecary

Ap. Who calls SO loud?

Rom. Come hither, man. I see, that thou art
poor:
Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear »

As will disperse itself through all the veins
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

Ap. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.

Rom. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
, Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes, to

/ Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
- The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

Ap. My poverty, but not my will, consents.

Rom. I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

Ap. Put this in any liquid thing you will.



Scene Two] ROMEO AND JULIET 109

And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would despatch you straight.
Rmn. There is thy gold, worse poison tomep's
sbuls, a

Doing more murder in this loathsome worid,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not

^seU.
1 sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell; buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.

[Exeunt.

Scene II — Friar Laurence' t cell
Enter Friar John
Fri. J. Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!
Efiter Friar Laurence

Fri. L. This same should be the voice of Friar
John.
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

Fri. J. Going to find a bare-foot brother out.
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick.
And finding him, the searchers of the town.
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign, i

Seal'd up the doors and would not let us forth;
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.



no ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Five

Fri. L. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

Fri. J. I could not send it, — here it is again, —
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee.
So fearful were they of infection.

Fri. L. Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhoodi
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence; «

Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

Fri. J. Brother, I '11 go and bring it thee. {ExU.

Fri. L. Now must I to the monument alone;
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake:
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!

[Exit,

Scene III — A Churchward; in it a tomb belonging lo the
CapuleU

Enter Paris, and his Page, bearing fiowera and a

Par. Give me thy torch, boy; hence, and stand
aloo!:
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along.
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread.
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,



ScEME Thbee] BOMEO and JULIET IH

But thou slialt hear it: whistle then to me.

As sigjial that thou hear'st something approach.

Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

Page. [Aside.] I am almost afraid to stand alone lo
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.

[Retires.
Par. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I

strew, —
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones; —
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew.

Or, wanting that, with tears distiU'd by moans:
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep,

[The Page whistles.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night.
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite? *«

What, with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.

[Retires.

Enter Rohro and Balthasar, reilh a torch, mai-
loc/t, ^.

Ram. Give me that mattock and the wrenching
iron.
Hold, take this letter: early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof.
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my lady's face;
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger , ao



112 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fi¥«

A precious ring, a ring that I must use

In dear employment; therefore hence, begone:

But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry

In what I further shall intend to do,

By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint

And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:

The time and my intents are savage-wild.

More fierce and more inexorable far

Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

Bal. I will be gone, sir, and ^t trouble you. «

Rom. So shalt tbou show me friendship. Take
thouthaf?tA. :'- &lt;'^^f''^4^,
Live, and be prosperous: and farewellSgoRi5 fellow'.

Bal. [Asvie.] For all this same, I '11 hide me
hereabout:
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [RsHres.

Rom. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death.
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth.
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And, in despite, I '11 cram thee with more food!

[Opens the Umh.

Par. This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which

grief, 6

It is supposed, the fair creature died;
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.

[Comes forward.
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than dealhP
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.



Scnra Thibb] ROMEO AND JUUET US

Rom. I must indeed; and therefore came I
hither.
Good geatle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Ply hence, and leave me: think upon these gone; «o
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth.
Put not another sin upon my head.
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.

Par. I do defy thy conjurations.
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

Itam. Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee,

boy! [They fight. 70

Page. O Lord, th^ fight! I will go call the
watch. [Exii.

Par. 0, 1 am slain. [Falls.] If thou be merciful.
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [Diet.

Rom. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet, bo

To think it was so? O, give me thy hand.
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
1 11 bury thee in a triumphant grave;
A grave? O, no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.



114 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fin

Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.

[La^ng Paris in the dmb.
How oft, when men are at the point of death.
Have they been merry ! which their keepers call
A lightning before death: 0, how may I ■ i(

Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty :
Thou art not conquet'd; beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lipa and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee.
Than with that hand that cut thy (youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy? w

Forgive me, cousin'! Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous.
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramoiu"?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee:
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again: here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids; 0, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest, ni

■ And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your

last!
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide'.



SceueTbbee^ ROMEQ AKD JULIET 115

Thou desperate pilot, no* at once ran on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Here 's to my love! [Drinks.] O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. u

[Dies.

Enter, ai the other end of the churchyard. Friar Lau-
rence, teiih a lantern, crow, and spade

Fri. L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-
night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who 's
there?
Bal. Here 's one, a friend, and one that knows

you well.
Fri. L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my
friend.
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern.
It bumeth in the Capels' monument.

Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there 'a my



One that you love.

Fri. L. Who is it?

Bal. Romeo.

Fri. L. How long hath he been there?

Bal. Full half an hour, iso

Fri. L. Go with me to the vault.

Bal. I dare not. sb:

My mast^ knows not but I am gone hence;
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his intents.



116 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fivi

Fri. L. Stay then; I 'U go alone. Fear comes
upon me;
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

Bal. As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought.
And that my master slew him.

FH. L. Romeo! [Adcanees.

Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains ui

The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?

[Etii^s the tomi.
Romeo! 0, pale! Who else^ what, Paris too?
And steep'd in blood? Ah!' what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs, [Juliet waket.

Jill. comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be.
And there I am. Where is my Romeo? w

[Noise vrUkin.

Fri. L. I hear some noise. Lady , come from that
nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted oiu' intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I '11 dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Come, go, good Juliet [Noiae again], I dare no
longer stay.



I



Scene Thbee] ROMEO AND JULIET 117

Jul. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away. lac
[Exit Fri. L.
What 's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end :
churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
Haply, some poison yet doth hang on them.
To make me die with a restorative. [Kisses kirn,

Thy Ups are warm.

First Watch. [Within.] Lead, boy: which w^?

Jvi. Yea, noise? then I '11 be brief. O happy

dagger! [Snatching Romeo's dagger.

This is thy sheath [Stabs herself]; there rust, and

let me die. \n

[Falls on Romeo's body and dies.

Enter Watch, rviik the Page of Pahis
Page. This is the place; there, where the torch

doth bum.
FirstWatch. The ground is bloody; search about
the churchyard:
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find, attach.
Ktiful sight! here lies the county slain:
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead.
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
Raise up the Montagues: some otheis search:
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
But the true ground of all these piteous woes is(

We cannot without circiimstance descry.



...Google



118 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Pira

lU-enter some of the Watch, mtk Balthasar

Sec. Watch. Here 's Romeo's man; we found him

in the churchyard.
First Waick. Hold him in safety, till the prince
come hither.

Re-enter others of the Watch, nitk Friar Laurence
Third Watch. Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs,
and weeps:
We took this mattock and this spade from hlyn .
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
First Watch. A great suspicion: stay the friar too.

Enter the Princi: and Attendants
Prin. \^^lat misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning's rest?

Enter Capulet, Lady Capui.et, and otkert
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek

abroad? im

La. Cap. The people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run.
With open outcry, toward our monument.

Prin. What fear is this which startles in our

ears?
First Watch. Sovereign, here lies the County
Paris slair;
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before.
Warm and new kill'd.
Prin. Search, seek, and know how this foul
murder comes.



ScnreTHiEE] ROMEO AND JUUET 1)9

First Waiek, Here is a friar, and slau^ter'd
Romeo's man;
With matrumenta upon thent, fit to open &lt;oo

These dead men's tombs.

Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter
bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en, — - for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague, —
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!

La. Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell.
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

Enter Montaoue and others

Prin. Come, Montague; for thou art early up.
To see thy son and heir more early down.

Mon. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night; eio
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath;
What further woe conspires against mine ageP

Prin. Look, and thou shalt see.

Mon. thou untaught! what manners is in
this,
To press before thy father to a grave?

Prin. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities.
And know their spring, their head, their true de-
scent;
And then will I be general of your woes
And lead you even to death : meantime forbear, tto
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

Fri. L. I am the greatest, able to do least.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place

L;oogle



ISO ROMEO AND JULIET (Act Fin

Doth make against me, of this direful murder;
And here I stand, hoth to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.

Prin. Then say at once what thou dost know
in this.

Fri. L. I will be brief, for my short date of
breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale. &lt;«

Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
Banish 'd the new-made bridegroom from this city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Jiiliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
To County Paris : then comes she to me.
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some means m
To rid her from this second marriage.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death: meantime, I writ to Romeo,
' That he should hither come as this dire night.
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave.
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter. Friar John, UO

Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Return 'd my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking.
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;



Scene Theee] ROMEO AND JULIET 121

Meaning 1:0 keep her closely at my cell,

Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:

But when I came, some minute ere the time

Of her awaking, here untimely lay

The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.

She wakes; and I entreated her come forth, te&lt;

Snd bear this work of heaven with patience:

But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;

And she, too desperate, would not go with me.

But, as it seems, did violence on herself.

All this I know; and to the marriage

Her nurse is privy : and, if aught in this

Miscarried by my fault, let my old life

Be sacrificed, some hour before his time.

Unto the rigour of severest law.

Prin. We still have known thee for a holy

man. «t(

Where 's Romeo's manP what can he say in this?

Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's
death;
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
,^d threaten'd me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not and left him there.

Prin. Give me the letter; I will look on it.
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place? sao

Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's
grave;
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did :
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;



ISS, , HOMEO AND JULIET (Act Fi™

And, by and by, my master drew on bi'm ;
And then I ran away to call the watcb.

Prin. This letter doth make good the frig's
words.
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vaiUt to die, and lie with Juliet. m

Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate.
That heaven finds means to kill yom- joys with

love.
And I for winking at your discords too.
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.

Cap. brother Montague, give me thy hand:
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

Mon. But I can give thee more:

For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
That while Verona by that name is known, . «

There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

Cap. As rich shall Romeo by his lady lie;
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

Prin. A glooming peace this morning with it
brings;

The sun for sorrow, will not show his head;
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;

Some shall be pardon'd and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo. [Exeuni.)*



ABBREVIATIONS

Abbott Abbott's Shalutpeanan Grammar, 3d edii

Brooke ...-., Arthur Brooke's poem, Rom^u and JidUt,
ed. Mutiro, J. J.

FlorF First Folio (1633) of Shakespeare's playa.

F 9 Second Folio (IG32&gt;

Pf FoUos.

N. E. Diet. . . . A New Brurlith Dictionary, ed. Munaj'.

Q 1 First Quarto (1597) of JiomfO and /u/i«t.

Q 9 Second Quarto (1^99).

Q 3 Third Quarto (160J).

Q 4 Fourth Quarto.

Q S Fifth Quarto (1637).

Qq Quartos.

Schmidt &amp;-hmidt's Shakerpeart Lemeon.



PROLOGUE

The object of a prologue is to give the audience in a few words,
the bubjedand character of the plaf about to be presented. Since
this prologue has no marked stylistic excellence, doubt is some-
times expressed as to its authorship. The form is identical with
that of Shakespeare's Bonnets, as is the epilogue to ffonty V. See
Appendix A, iii, for the form of the Prologue printed in Q 1.

4. ci'inT, i.». belonging to the state.

6. slar-CTOSs'd. The domination of evil stars governed the fate
of the lovers. Belief that etars control our destiny is not unknown
at the present day, but among the Eliiaijethans it had more gen-
eral acceptance. In this play Romeo, especially, refers to it again
and ag^n. Shakespeare's interest in astrology is attested In San-
ntli xiv and xv.

8. do. Rowe's correction from the older chlk, which is retained



124 BOiMEO AMD JULIET [Act ft™

by some editors and Is defensible on gronnds of usage. But the sai'-
cession of sounds, " Doth v/iCh their death," makes the line undeni-
ably harsh.

12. twohouTs'. Ofinterestasindicatingthelengthof perform-
ance of SD Elizabethan play. Allusions in contemporarj dianui
point to thesame conclusion. Cf. Henry VIII, Prologue:
"may see away their shilling
Richly in two short hours."



ACT I -SCENE 1

This scene Is ao admirable example of dramatic skill in opening
the play. A fight beginning among some ignorant servants and
gradually involving most of the important personages in the C^n-
let and Montague families, not only introduces these charactera,
but at the same time explains the situation between the houses,
emphasizes the senseless feud, and strikes the keynote of the trag-
edy. In contrast to the mad fury of morit of his friends and foes is
Romeo'4 affected melancholy, the result of unrequited love for a
Capulet maiden. His presence in such an atmosphere is sure to
bring misfortune. The fiery speeches of T3balt and the explidt
warning by Prince Escalus foreshadow the tragic developments of
act iii, scene 1.

1. carry coals, put up with insults, bear affronts. The lovrest
meiiial servants were supposed to carry the coal, and hence to sub-
mit to any indignity. In the sam6 connection may be explained
tl.e term eotliyt, in the nent line.

4. choleT, As the pun woulif indicate, the pronunciation was
then as now almost the same as Ifial of " cuiiaik." Jonson has the
same pun, Eveij Man in Ilia llumour^i. 5. 8-9.

16. lake the wall, figurative for "getting the better-t^" In
the narrow, undrained streets of this period the side of the road
nearest the wall was safer and hence was much sought after when
travellers met. But it was deemed one of the privileges of rank to
" take the waJl " side from those of meaner birtkk^

17. the weakest goes to the wall, a po-pulaT p^Sverbof tfaetime,
and the title of an anonymous play, published in 1600.

30. weaker vessels, a Biblical allusion. See 1 P»ter, iil T.

S7. poor John, hake dried and salted, apparently the staple fbod
of servants during Lent. Of course Gregory is hitting at the IcMf
iiess of bis comrade.



SB. two o] . . . the Montagues. They reco|^tie their foes at
a distance by the tokens worn in their caps. Cf. Gawwigiie, Dtvict

" And tor a f luilier proofe he shened in hya hat
Thys token which the Mountacutet did beare alwaies, (or that
They covet to be knowne from CapeU, where they pass,
For aoicient grutch whych long ago 'tweenethea« two houses waa."

U. take the law of our sides. Q 1 reads on ota- tide*, which

gives the correct loeaning.

48. bile my thumb, " to threaten or delie, by putting the thumbe
naile into the mouth, and with a Jerke (from the upper teeth) make
to knacke " (Cotgrave),

66. one of mg master's kinsmen, i. ». Tybalt Benvolio coming
tonj the other side, is unnoticed.

70. swashing, the reading of Qq. 4, 5, generally accepted in place
of the wanhinii of Q 3, F. Sinathing means smashing, crushing, as
in At Yoa Like It, L 3. 133, " a swashing and a martial outside."
But Dowden thinks Miaahinii " Is possible," and follows Daniel in
citing Richard Harvey, Plaina P»tc«'oH(1S89) : " A washing blow
of this [a quarter-staff] is as good as a Laundresse." To this cita-
tion may be added Fletcher, The Wild-Qoote Chtue{c. 1621), v. 4. 38,
'• give her but a washing blow," which Wilson emends to twathinff.

71. Pari, fools! Benvolio furnishes a strong foil to Tybdt, and
later to Merautio.

73. Wlutt, art Ihou draumf Is your sword drawn ? Seel. 77,

/leMtoss lunds. Not^the word-play between_i«iElc_and_^a£&amp;.
Utnrtlait hfTf- ^ ip'nifipii cowardly. H' mdt may jnr^njep^'^'- -ja^w
as well as menials,.

79. Havejli thee, I shall strike thee, a conventional threat.

SO. Clubs, bUls, and partisans, a fall for men armed with these
weapons to put down the disturbance " Clubs ! " was a famili.ii
street-cry of Shakespeare's London, originally applied to the ap-
prentices, but later to the policemen.

81. in his gown, i. e. nightgown. Old Capulet's rest has been
disturbed by the fray.

B2. my long sword, for defence % his short sword served only for
ornament.

83. a crutch. Lady Capulet. who is younger than her husband,
insinuates that he is too iufirm to engage in conflict



126 ROMEO AND JULIET jAct o»-

SB. in spite of me. Notthe modem sense ofthe phrase, but "in
despite or deliaiice of me." Cf. Miltoo, L'AUegro :



98. mry word, light word. Cf. Hamlet, iL 9, 267: " I hold
ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow's
shadow."

103. cankefd. See Glossary.

109. Free-lovin, Villa tVanea In the Italian story. Shakespean
found the English word In Brooke, used of the castle in which Paris
and Juliet were to wed. See Appendix B. 1.

119. Who, nothing hurt withal. Who in Elizabethan English is
frequently used of inanimate objects regariied as persons. See
Abbott, § 364, and cf. i. *. 100, and iii. 3. 38, bek&gt;w. For the ad-
verbial use of nothing, cf. Abbott, § 55. Withal = with it, as fre-
quently in Shakespeare,

128. "The sycamore or wild-fig tree Shakespeare has referred
to in Love't Labour's Lost, v. 3, and in Othello, iv. 3, as a tree whose
shade is dedicated to dejected lovers " (Delius),

131. ware. See Glossary.

134. This line was adapted from Q 1 by Pope. Man; editon
prefer the reading of the other Quartos and the Folio :



Hudson, adopting this latter readinir, construes " His disposition
was to be In soHtude, as he could hardly endure even so much com-
pany as himself." The thought of the present reading is funda'
mentally " never less alone than when alone," an apothegm
attributed by Cicero to Scipio AA-icanus, and repeated many times
by both Latin and English writers. An extended series of notes on
the phrase was called forth by Professor A. S. Cook in Modtr*
Lanrpiane Nolet, xxiv, xxv, and xxvi.

143. Observe the double pun here concerning the heavy wa
(sun) who steals atitay from light

1G7. bit with. For the use of this preposition where we should
use "by," cf. Abbott. § 193.

169. the sun. Theobald's emendation for Ike gam« of Qq Ff.

161. Enter Romeo. Some critics place his entrance four lines
below, where Benvolio first addresses him. Homeo probably enters



Scene One] NOTES 13/

st the back of the stage and is coming forward to meet his Meods
vhilethey are speaking these lines.

166. io hear true shrift, as to hear an honest confession. For
omission of cu, see Abbott, g ^1.

166. good morrow, good morning. Romeo is surprised to learn
that it is not yet noon.

167. njf me / the bver's sigh. Note Juliet's use of it, ii. 8. 35,
and Mercutio's raillery, ii. 1. 10, below.

176. view, i A appearance. In 1. ITT, below, it means sight,
paver of seeing.

177. slill See Glossary.

178. Love is represented as blindfolded, and yet he finds his
way to thfe hearts of all. The meaning is not, aa some have
thought, that Love pereeives the road that he is forbidden to take.
These lines fiiirly represent the conventional love-language of the
Elizabethans.

181. The family hntred interferes with Romeo's love. Rosaline
is a. Capulet. as i. S. 12. below, indicates,

1S3. create. Some editors prefer crmt«d, the reading of Q 3.
The meaning would be the same in both cases, but create seems
preferable on account of the rhyme so produced. Couplets are often
introduced into the midst of blank verse, as in U. 190-19T, 199-204,
W8-209, etc. . below.

163. propagate, " to extend j to increase " (Webster), a sense
now obsolete.

to have it presl, by having it pressed : the infinitive is used
gerundially. See Abbott, g 356. Dowden suggests that the ref-
erence is to Benvolio's word, oppression. 1. IflO, above.

186, too much of mine own. Professor Chambers cites fombt,
iv, T. 117 1

" For goodness growing to a pluriay.
Dies in his own too much."

196. raised. So reads Q 1 ; others have made, which some
editors prefer.

197. purged, purified from sraoke.

200. choking gall . . . preserving sweet. " The line means
Inat love kills and keeps alive, is a bane aiidan antidote " (Dowden).

SOS. sadness, soberness, seriousness. So sadly, I. ^7, means
seriously.

314-226. It has l)een suggested that Shakespeare may have
'utended these hnes as a compliment to Queen Elizabeth.



198 EOMF.O AND JULIET [Act Ohi

316. Dion's wit, " a mind like Diana's, with reference both to
her will and to her intelligence " (Strunk).

316. strong proof, "a state of having been tried and having
stood the test " (Herfbrd).

217. unharm'd. the reading; of Q I, which has been generally
adopted. F 1 and alt the quarto:! except Q 1 read uncharm'd, but
this word seems Inconsistent with the figure of the bow and arrow.
Collier has mcharmed.

318. siege. The figure of a besieged castle, applied to a lady
sued by her tover, was one of the most common in Shakespeare'E
day. So CyinbeUne, iii: 4. 136 :



Vemu and Adonii, 433 : " Remove your siege from my unyielding

heart." It is the same figure that Regan uses in Kinif Lear, t. S.

76, when in token of complete surrender to Edmund she exclaims:

'* Dispose of them, of me ; the walls are thine."

232, 224-225. By resolving to remain a maiden she will leave
no one to inherit her beauty. Dowden quotes Sonnelt, xi. 9-10 1

" Let those whom Nature hath Dot made for store
Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish."

The same thought is repeated many times in BonruU. i.-xviL Itis
also found in contemporary writings. So about 1590 Robert Greene
in his play. Friar Bacon ( Works, ed. Collins, v. 1. 1908) makes Lacy
exclaim to his bebved Margaret, who is about to become a nun:



227. wisely too fair. " There is in her too much sanctimonious
wisdom united with beauty which induces her to continue chaste
with the hope of attaining heavenly bliss " (Malone|.

230. " To force that exquisite beauty of hers yet more upon my
judgment, and so make mc more keenly alive to it " (Herfotd).

236. these happy masks, probably not referring specifically to
masks worn hy spei-tators at the play, but to women's masks in
general, happif in being permitted to touch their fair ftrowj. Ot
course, there is a further suggestion that Rosaline's l&gt;eaut; suf
passes that of other ladles as far as a fair lady's counteuaace EU^



ScEHi Two] NOTES 129

passes the mask. The figures elaborated in lines 938-49 give
other turns to the same thought.

238. strucken. For form see Abbott, § 3U, and compare Kinff
Lear, i 4. 93: " I 'II not be strucken, my lord."

240. passing, surpassingly, exceedingly, as in OthdU), L 3. 160 :
" T was strange, 'twas passing strange."

UA. doctrine, teachin);. instruction, the literal sense of the
= give that instruction, whatever



SCENE 8

Here we ate concerned with two distinct lines of action. First,
Paris is shown (as in no earlier version of the story) to be a claim-
ant for Juliet's hand even before the latter meets Romeo. Then,
at the Buggesticn of Benvolio, Romeo decides on the dangerous
step of attending uninvited a feast at the Capulet home.

1. But Montague is bound. Shakespeare learned early the
playwright's trick of adding vitaUty to his scenes by opening them
in the midst of a conversation.

4. reckonirm, estimation, distinction. N. E, Diet, quotes
Cogan's translation of PitUo't Travelt, xlvii. 971 1 " He found that
some fifty thousand were missing, all men of little reckoning."

9. fmiTteen years. Painter makes Juliet eighteen, and Brooke
makes her sixteen. Exactly why Shakespeare reduces her age
still more is not easy to see. One theory is that in the edition of
Brooke which he used, "xvi " may have been misprinted " xiv."
Professor Barrett Wendell suggests that he wished to use the pun
in I. 3. 13, below, and that the word " six " there would give too
harsh a sibilant line. Another critic thinks that.owing toCapulet's
real or feigned reluctance to part with his daughter, Shakespeare
changed the age in order to give him a better excuse. But Dow-
den notes that Shakespeare's. Marina in Perii:hs\&amp; foitfteEn. that
M irand a in The Tempest is onl y fifteen, and elsewhere that Abigail
in Marfow?s Je w of J/nfi a, described as "the sweetest flower in
Cytherea's fielS'^. iv. 5. 99, below), is fourteen. This seems to
indicate that some literary con ventionguiil£sl-£liakespeare, although
fourteen strike s modem readers a s un reasonably yo ung.

11, Cf. Brooke, I. ISfiO: "Scarcesaw she yet full sixteen yearsi
too young to l&gt;e a bride."

13. Trade, the reading of Q 2. F, against the mnrried of Q 1.
The quibble between nwde and wior occurs in ii. 4. Ii'l-S. below.



130 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Om

But there is a. similar quibble between marred and marritd fbuod
in Shakespeare and other writers, as in All 'e Well, ii. 3. 315 : "A
yovag man married is a man that 's marr'd. "

11. alt my hopes but she. Oipulet, who is an old man. maf
have lost some t:hi!dren by a former wife. That Juliet is the only
child of the present union is distinctly implied in lii. S, 166, belov.
On the other hand, Shakespeare may have made here, as else-
where, a slip too trivial to be noticed in an acted play.

For the use of ehe where her is demanded by strict grammatical
taws, cf. Abbott's explanation, § 311, that the seemed more like an
uninflected noun than he.

IB, lady of my earth, probably a mere translation of the French
expression for heiress, j{ff« de terre, with a quibble on earth in the
previous line. But Dowden takes earth to mean "my body," as in
ii. 1. 2.

17, but a part, subordinate to. Capulet forgets this speech
later. Cf. lii. 5. 150 ff.

23. makes. Apparently there is confusion as to subject be-
tween you and oiie mure. Cf, Abbott, § *I2. Or we may place a
Hem icolon after store, in which case one would be the sutgect of the

25. earth-Ueading stars, i. e. " all the admired beauties of
Veron,!. "

26. young men. Johnson su^^ested the emendation yeomen,
but Malone compares Sonnets, xcviii. 2-3 :

" When proud-pied April dress'd in all his trim
Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing."

30. irtheril, obtain. Cf. Luke, xviii. 18: "Good Master, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life ? "

32, 33. The couplet is undoubtedly obscure and has given critics
much difficulty. The meaning seems to be, " On further observa-
tion of many of these, my daughter may be counted anong tie
number, though her estimation, or value, will be nothing." Tie
figure one was then considered as no number. To show this many
passages from Elizal&gt;ethan wiitings have been cited, as Sonnelt,

" Among a number one is reckon'd none ;
Then in the number let me pass untold."

4S. in good (I'me, at the opportune moment. Just when he needs
tiiera he sees coming two men who can probably read the list for him.



, Cf. Coriolanm, Iv. T. 54 : " One fire drives out one fire ; oDe
one nail." Brooke, L iOI, puts it :



4S-B1. These lines, liice Romeo's speeth. ii. 93-8, below, in
form and spirit resemble the aeatette, or c-oncluding six lines of the
sonnet as Shakespeare wrote it, Cf. v. 3. li-17, and v. 3. 305-10,
below. Complete sonnets in the play arc the Prologue, the Chorus
between acts i. and II., and i. S. 95-108, below. The presence of
these sonnet forms in the text points to early workmanship of
Shakespeare, when he was experimenting with metrical forms.

48. tvAp. On this old form where we use the weak preterit
Ag(/(wi. see Abbott. S 343. The older form is still heard.

49. cures, heals ; the only instance of the verb used intransi-
tively by Shakespeare.

62. Romeo is not insane, as Benvolio alFerts to conclude from this
tem!.rk, but is too busy dreaming of Rosaline to follow closely his
friend's observations. Since Benvolio haa mentioned '■ grief "
(which sometimes meant a wound), infection, and poison, he sug-
gests a sovereign remedy for physical hurts, die. the plantain leaf.

SS-S7. These lines indicate the ordinary treatment of madmen
by Shakespeare's contemporaries. Readers of Tioelflh Niffht will
recall how Malvolio is imprisoned and tormented during his sup-
posed madness.

S3. Cod gi' god-den, God give you a good evening. According
to Schmidt this salutation was used only by the common people to
Uieir superiors. Cf. ii. 4. 1 16, and iii. S. 113. below.

66. rest you merry ! God keep you merry, the parting
salut.-ltion.

70, 72. The names of both Mcrcutio and Rosaline will be no-
ticed on the list of invited guests. Mercutio deems to be on
rrieiidiy terms with both of the hostile houses, while Rosaline is a
niece to Old Capulet

86. crush a cup, a common expression for drinking, like " crack
a bottle " to-day. Compare Shallow's phrase, "crack a quart" in
ilUnryJV, V. 3. 66.

90. urui(((rin(e&lt;I,i. e. impartial.

Oa-93. See note on II. 46-41. above.

95 S. Reference is to Romeo's eyes, which though often drowned
in tears still live to maintain their opinion. If Benvolio's state-



132 KOMEO AND JULIET [Act Oki

metits be true, Romeo would wish the tears to be changed to fire,
BO that like heretics bis eyes might be destroyed. Witches were
burned because, ai^cording to popular belief, they could not be
drowned.

101, that crystal scales. For other oouns now plural but used
as singular by Shakespeare, see Abbott. § 338.

102. lady's love. So read all the old editions. Theobald pro-
posed iady4oB9, an enendation which has metwith general favor.

IM. scant, scaKely ; an adverb her&amp;



SCENE S

Tue heroine of the play now first appears on the stage in conver-
utlon with her mother and a garrulous nurse: News as to Paris's
prospecU're suit Is received by her with indifference, as her heart iJ
not now set on marriage. The whole scene clearly looks forward la
scene 5 of this act.

3. tady-bird, sweetheart; a term of affection. Cf. Jonson, Q«&gt;-
thia'i RmtU (ISOO ; ed. Judson, A. C), ii. 4. 7 1 *• Is that your new
niffe, sweet lady-hird ? "

4. God forbid I Probably the true meaning of this ejaculation
is that given by Dyce ; that the Nurse, not getting any reply to her^
call, exclaims, " God forbid " that any harm should have come to
her darling.

The line is scanned. No. 1, in Appendix D.

7. give leave awhile, let us talk awhile in private ; a common
form of dismissal. Cf. S Ileuty Vi, iil ^. 33 : "Lords, give UJ
leave. 1 11 try this widow's wit."

9. thou % a colloquialism for "Thou shalt." Cf Lear, iv. S.
846 ! " Ise try whether your costard or my hallow be the harder."
where the first word is a similarly formed contraction fbr "I
shall."

13. teen. For meaning see Glossary, and cf. note on i. S. 9&gt;
above. The Nurse employs this word with /our to bring out the
pun.

The line Is scanned. No, S, in Appendix D.

IE. Lammas-tide, loof-moss, August 1, in England, the time
of harvest festival. All the events of the play take place in July
or August. This is in harmony with Benvolio's words, iii. 1. S-4,

17. Th; line Is scanned, No. 3, in Appendix D.



SCEKE ThHEeI notes ISS

23. since the earthquake . . . eleven years. The aigrnifi-
canL-e of this line in determining the date of the ptay has already

«n referred to in the Introduftion. It need hardly be said here
Uiat from the general character of the Nurse's speech not too much
seriousness should be attached to her statements. Although she
cl^ma to bear a bruin, she is garrulity itself, and contradicts
kerself several times in the course of her remarks. Granting that
1 reference to th» earthquait would to the audience imply only
the great earthquake of 1580, it does nnt follow that the play must
have been written eleven years later. For if this be true, it is hard
to see why the words eleven yean should have been left un-
changed when the play was revised some time after 1591.

an. The line is scanned. No. 4.. in Appendix D.

27. Rolfe suggests here a comparison with the words of Dame
Quickly where in 2 //«BTy/l-',ii, 1. 93 if., she recalls to Falstaff the
most eitaet circumstances of his promising to mnrry her.

The line is scanned. No. 5, in Appendix D.

29. bear a brain, have a good racniory. See .V. E. Diet, under
brain for other examples of the phrase.

31. pretty foot. Fool is used here as a term of endearment, as
in the extremely pathetic allusion to Cordelia by her aged father,
Ltar, V. 3. 305 ; " And my poor fool is dead ! "

33. Shake, quoth the dove-house. The dove-house shook.
Daniel notes the phrase in other dramas of the day, as Peele, Old
yVive*' Tale (ed. Neilson), 1. 746: "Bounce, quoth the guns."
Exactly the same words are in Beaumont and Fletcher, The Kaiglit
of the Burning PeatU, v. 1, 95.

36. The hue is scanned, No. 6, ia Appendix D.

alone, the reading of the Folioand lale Quartosas opposed to the
hiffh-loni of Q 1 and /ly/oiw of Q 3. Many editors prefer the latter
reading, which would not alter the sense of the passage. Dowden
adopting it quotes N. E. Diet, and adds; "Some early examples
are of infants, which leads me to conjecture that it was a favorite
nursery word, as nurses nowadays encourage a child to stand loney-
pToudy." The usual substitute for the last word in at least one part
of the United States with which I am familiar is limeif-loniry, but 1
am told that ttiifh-loney is still not unknown as a synonymous ex-
pression. Cf. our idiom, '* It 's high time," etc., where hit/h is used

i. 80, "if we are

66. an honour that Idream j\ot of. Apparently JouBon paiodlel



I



13* ROMEO AND JULIET [Act One

this line In Cgnthla'i Itftrelt(ed. Judson), it. I. 31: "'t is tmonimaii
I (Ireame not of." The italics of the one word changed are

72. much upon these gears, almost at the same a^. Hovolil
does this make Lady Capuiet? Her husband is evidently mueb

76. man of wax, i. e. perfect. The meaning is given in a pas-
sage cited by Dyee from Fairs Em. an anonymous drama once
attributed to Shakespeare !

" A sweet face, nn exceeding daintie band ;
A body, were it framed of was
By all the cmining artists of the world.
It could not better be proportioned."

Dowden quotes Field, A Woman is a Weatliereoeh : '*By JoTe.it
is a little man of wax."

81-94. " Shakespeare was evidently fond of resembling the ftce
to a book, and having once arrived at this similitude, the compari-
son, however odd, of the eyes to the margin, wherein of old the
commentary' on the text was printed, is not altogether unnatural.
This passage, which presents tJotb the primary and the subordinate
metaphor, is the best example he has given of this peculiar assod-
ation of ideas" (Staunton). Cf. i. 1. 341-2, above, where Ross-
line's face is compared to a note. The large number of conceits in
the passage point to its composition duritig the immaturity of the
author, and when euphuism was in vof!;ue.

83: married lineament, all the members of his body well ba^
monized. This reading, since the figure is consistent with the tone
of the whole speech, seems more satisfactory than the ttesrat lima-
'•neat of Q 1 and Ff, adopted by some editors.

86. margenf of his eyes. Malone quotes Lucreet, 99-103 1

" But she that never coped with stranger eyes.
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks.
Nor read the subtle-ahining secrecies
Writ in the glassy margents of suph books."

88. cover. Probably, as Mason suggests, this is merely a quib-
ble on the contemporary French law phrase for a married woman,
who was styled a feme ctreert.

89. lives in the sea. Probably she means that the bride wa&gt;
yet to be caught, alluding to the famihar proverb.



ScESE Fouh] notes "x^' 1 135



96. like of. Abbott, g ITT. gives other instances of this idiom
in Shakespeare. Formerly it was tuslomary to say, " It likes rae
of the man," rather than " 1 lilce the man." Abbott thinks the
phrase in question may have originated in this impersonal use of
the verb.

98. endart. Pope preferred eagagt found In Q I . but the present
reading merely begins the figure from archery which is continued in
the next line.

SCENE 4.

Of little dramatic importance is this scene, though it contains one
notable poetic passage. Then it introduces the high-spirited Mer-
cutio, henceforth to play a leading r61e in the plot. In Brooke
Meroutio is a rival of Romeo, but Shakespeare, while using him as
a foil to both Benvolio and Romeo, makes him the indirect cause
of Tybalt's death, and so of Romeo's banishment

1, thii speech. Furness suggests the ipeech, but there is not
sufficient reason for emendation. Romeo perhaps feels the need
of an apolorry more than his companions do, since it is the home of
bis father's chief enemy which he is entering uninvited.

3. prolixitj/, tedious detail. It was customary for maskers on
coming to a feast to send in some one to announce their arrivaL
Thus in Henry VIII. i, i. 65, the Chamberlain announces in stately
words the coming of the King and his fellow-niHskers ; and in Timon
of Athem, \. 9, 198, Cupid is the forerunner of "certain ladies most
desirous of admittance."

«. hoodurink'd, blindfolded ; the literal meaning of the word,
from hood + vtinked.

6, aTartafs painted bow. " The Tartarian bows . . . resem-
bled in their form the old Roman or Cupid's bow, such as we see
on medals and bas-reliefs. Shakespeare uses the epithet to distin-
guish it from the English bow, whose shape is the segment of a
circle " (Dou&lt;re).

•' Lath means here wood ; hut bows were regularly made of this
material. Perhaps Shakespeare was thinking of the * da^^r of
lath ' used by the Vice in the moralities, and used lath to fill out
his line without special regard to the context," Cf. Taml/tk Ififfht,
iv. 3. 134 fF. :

'• Like to the old Vice . . .

Who with dagger of lath,

' In his rage and his wrath.

Cries, ah, hal to the devil." , , „ , Gooylc



ROMEO AND JULIET



CTOw-keepeT

7&lt; S. These lines evidently have more than a literal significance,
and two interpretations of thera are possible. It is sometimea sug-
gested that the dramatist may be striking at actors who i.i a vnth-
out-book protoffue would speak " more than is set down for them."
Compare the advice to the players in HamUt, iii. 8. *iS. But
Professor E. K. Chambers regards this explanation as " not likely,"
and adds, " The reference is to a Prologue speaker who doesnt
know his lines." This last interpretation would explain why the
actor without the book in bis bands speaks faintly . . . ajUr thi
prompter.

8. entrance, a trisyllable. See Appendix D, and ;f. Ma/iMh,
i. 5. 40 i " That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan."

11. a torch. Every troop of maskers had its tortthbearer. So
Jessica in male attire carries the torch for Lorenzo and his com-
pany of maskers in The Merchant of Venice, iL 6. Romeo is affecting
too melancholy a mood to take part in the vanity of his fellows.

12. heavy . . . light, a quibble which apparently age could not
wither nor custom state for the Elizabethan. The numerous puns
in this scene will not escape any careful reader ; s. p. meiiaure, m*w-
art; aoles, sotd ; mre, eoar ; hound, hound: done, dnji. While Such
puns occur more frequently in Shakespeare's earlier than in his
later plays, the dramatist employed them till the last

SI. pitch, Uterally = point, but it probably continues the figure
from falconry expressed or implied in lines 18-22.

30. a visor for a visor ! Possibly, as some explain, an ugly
mask is handed to Mercutio and he takes it. Others think that he
dona no mask on account of his fantastic face. Littledale makes
the plausible suggestion to punctuate with an exclamation point
after 1. 39, as Mercutio refuses the offered mask.

31. quote, notice, oljserve ; cf. Troilut and Cresaida, iv, S, 233i
" I have , . . quoted joint by joint."

36. rushes, used then on floors as we use carpets.

38. a candle-holder, idle spectator, like our ■' wall-flower."
Romeo is jrrovsrb'd with this grandsire phraie.

40. dun's the mouse. UlaXoat cites Patient Oriasel {1603);" daa
is the mouse, lie stilL" He- adds, " I know not why, this phrase



ScEKE Four] NOTES 13?

seems to have meant * Peace ; be still ! ' and hence it may be said to
be ' the constable's own word ' while apprehending an offender and
afraid of alarming him by any noise." The origin of the phrase is
still unsettled, but as the mouse is dun-colored and proverbially
quiet, some eonneetion between the two qualities may have been
supposed. Of course, Mercutio characteriaticBlly ^^oes far astray to
employ the pun.

41. Having quibbled once with dun., Mercutio thinks of another
proverb founded on the common use of the word, like Dobbin, as
the name of an old horse, "to draw Dun out of the mire." Giffnrd
describes a Christmas gnme which he himself played and which
was so called. The object of tlie game was to lift Dun, a log which
had been brought into the midst of the room, and take it out. The
fun arose from letting the log fall on some one's toes. A friendly
critic has culled my attention to the fact that in another Eliza-
bethan play. Sir John Oldnastle, v. 3, one of the characters, Dick
Dunne, is mired in a slough, but 1 cannot see that the passage
sheds much hght on the e^ipression. Ine proverb is as old as
Chaucer, for in the prologue to the MancipWi TaU, ate found the
words, " Dun is in the mire."

42. Of this str-Teverence. So Q 1 ; other early editions Or tan*
your [or you] rgv&gt;r«nc». In either case we have a translation or
contraction of the Latin ablative ab.snlute, mZcd revfrentid. It was
a common form of apology for the introduction of any impropriety
in conversation, and later came to take on the meaning of the im-
proper words themselves. Exactly what Mercutio intends to sig-
nify will perhaps not bear too close examination.

43. bum daylight, to light a candle while the sun is shining;
figurativety used of wasting time, as Mercutio explains.

47. five wits, employed sometimes as synonymous with the five
senses, and again, according to Stephen Hawes (1554) as the intel-
lectual faculties or five inlets of ideas, " common wit, imagination,
fentasy, estimation (or judgment), and memory." The expression
here seems to bear the second interpretation. Mercutio says they
are burning daylight; Romeo, taking the remark literally, denies it
since they have their candles lighted at night. Mercutio liegs him
to consider the speeches with regard to their meaning, and find his
judgment there rather than among the intellectual (acuities. A
recent illuminating discussion in this field is Dowden's article on
" Elizabethan Psychology " in The Atlantic Monthly, vol, 100, pp.
38ft-99.

50. draam'd a dream. Romeo is superstitious by nature, and



138 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Okb

he fears the result of this maskiiig ft\)ni the start. Since the audi'
ence must have known the story well, the effect of this speech
would not be lost on them.

61. Note the contrast between the two friends. Compare the
conversation on the same subject between the &lt;;ocl£ and the hen in
Chaucer's Stm'a Priest's Tale.

63 fl. Is there any reason why this long speech of Mercutio's
should be introduced into the conversation here? Q 1 inserts after
1. 53 a query of Benvolio, "Queen Mab, what's she?" But eveii
with this reading the passage is scarcely justified from c dramatic
standpoint, and it must be taken as a Ij^cal outburst illustratini;
the ebullient fancy of the author at this stage. It is in mucli
the same strain as the fairy scenes of A Midsummer Night's

63. Queen Mab, a familiar personage in Celtic folklore, but
there has not been found in English literature any earher reference
to her than this. Drayton's Nt/mphidia (1S97) contains a descrip-
tion of her chariot, apparently imitated from Shakespeare. Pro-
fessor Chambers, in his edition of A Midsummer NiijhCt Dream
of this series, p. 144, has an interesting note on the various
names of the fairy queen, there called Titania. He observes
that the present account of Mab " has many points which
resemble the characteristics of the domestic spirit as found in
Robin Goodfellow."

61- fairies' midwife. Not to the fairies, but the fairy, herself,
who delivers dreamers of their fancies, those ekildren of an idll
hrain. 1. 97.

SB. agate-stone, a figure cut in the agate of a ting. So in
e Henrg IV, i. 2. 19, Falstaff, complaining of the diminutive site
of his page, exclaims, " I was never manned with an agate luitil

69. sellers', spiders'. Compare Latimer's words: "Where the
bee gathereth honey, even there the spinner gathereth venome"
So also A Midsnmmer Night's Dream, ii. 2. 21 : " Hence, you long-
legg'd spinners, hence '. "

G3. film, "the thin skin which separates the seed in the pods"
(Schmidt).

66. lazy finger, an allusion to the popular belief that idle young
women were apt to have worms in their fingers.

77, courtier's. Pope tries to avoid the repetition here by sub-
stituting lavyer's, the reading of Q 1, but that word is open to
precisely the same objection, being used in 1. 73, above. The



repetition may not have been intentional, but there is no necessity

for emendation.
85. Cf, 2 Henry IV, v. ^ 56-7 :

" Fill the cup, and let it come ;
I '11 pledge you a mile to the bottom."

89. AcL-ording to Douce reference is made to a euperstitioo that
evil spirits, taking the form of women clothed in white, haunted
stables in the night-time, carrying in their hands tapers of wax.
which they dropped on the horses' manea. thereby plaiting them '
in inextricable knots.

90. elf-locks, hairs l&gt;elieved to have been tangled by fairies or

91. btides. The real subject of this verb, vikieh, is plural, but
the notion of entangling gives a singular verb-form. See Abbott,
5337.

100. who. See note on i. 1. IIS, above.

103. face. Is this word or tide better? The latter has the
authority of all the earlj' editions except Q I, from which Pope
restored the present reading.

dew-dropping south. For some reason Shakespeare seems to
have associated the south with dampness, mist, and contagion. So
he has, Ai Yoa lAk» It. iii. 6, 50, " Uke foggy south puffing with
wind and rain"; 2 Henry IV, ii. *. 393, "Like the south. Borne
with black vapour"; TroUu* and Creasida, v. 1. 81, "The rotten
diseases of the south "j 2 Henry VI, liL 2. 384, "And \rith the
southern clouds contend in tears"; Coriolaniu, i. 4. 30, "All the
contagion of the south light on you " ; Cytabeline, ii. 3. 136,
"The south-fog rot him "; and Cgmbeline, iv. 3. 349, "From the
spongy south."

106. Again Romeo displays his fatalism. We were informed in
the Prologue that this was "a pair of star-cross "d lovers."

109. expire, cause to expire, finish. Dowden cites Lyly, Euphuet
(Arber, p. 77) ; " To swill the drink that will expyre thy date." \

111. The folios add a stage-direction: Tkey march about the
ttage, and Serviiufman come /orlh inilh their napklja. After some
frolicsome horse play they were to leave the stage and the next
scene was to follow immediately.



,,Goo^le



ROMEO AND JULIET



SCENE S



A Geiies of pictures of the feasting, dancing, and parleying at
Capulet'c banquet forms, from the spectacular Gtandpoint, one of
the rao'st effective scenes in the play. But despite the prevailing
tone of happiness in the first meeting of Romeo and Juliet, the in-
evitable love resulting on both sides is aci^iDpanied by a note of
trpgcdy. not only in the threats of Tybalt, the chief antagonist, but
also in the mental forebodings of evil that come to both lovers.

1. As in the opening scene, a touch of realism is added bj- begin-
ning the action with a conversation between servants. Of this con-
versation there is no hint in any known source.

8. couTt-cupboard, a movaljle cupboard used fiir the display of
plate.

good thou. See Abbott, g 13, for similar instances of the voca-
tive use of good.

16. (he longeT liver take all. Let him who lasts longer get the
whole reward — a familiar proverb of the time.

16. gentlemen, a dissyllable : see Appendix D. No. T, for Bcan-

21. deny, refuse, as in The Taming of the Shrem, ii, 1. 180; "If
she deny to wed, I 'II crave the day When I shall ask the t&gt;ana."

makes dainty, affects timidity.

22. come near you. Does the cap fit you? Compare I fl#&gt;i»y/V,
L 9. 14; "Indeed you come near me now, HaL"

28. a hall! Make room!

29. tum the tables up. " The tables in that day were fiat leaves
hinged together and placed on trestles ; when removed they were
therefore turned up " (Steevens).

30. quench the fire. Why should a fire be burning in an Italian
house in midsummer? The answer is that in Brooke's Rometu and
Juliet the feast at Capilefs house occurs when " weary winter
nifjhts restore the Christmas games." Shakespeare in shortening
the time of action and placing the feast in the hot season probably
overlooked this slight anachronishv. He was not in the habit of
watching such details with the mode^critic's eye.

32. cousin. Capulet is really his uncle, for see i. 9. 71, above.
but theterra "cousin "was then used of almost any relative. Later
Lady Capulet calls Tybalt her cousin although he is her nephew,

37. nuptial, nuptials, wedding; the usual form of the noun ia
Shakespeare.



ScEKE Five] NOTES .141

43 fl. Fuller compares the Borneo »n JtUielCi of Stniija, tnuiB-
latinj- from this Dutch play (see Appendix C) as follows : " There
for the first titne I beheld my love, who hke a silver mooD shone
down upon her mates. Next other jewels a briliiaat diamond she
appeared. Her two eyes I saw sparkle as gleam Castor and Pollux
on high."

46. knight. Cf. Brooke here : " With torch ia hand a comelf
knight did lead her forth to dance."

4T. /( seems she hangs. This is the reading of aD the Quartos
and of F I. Some editcirs prefer that of F 2, H«r beanig lumffa, etc.
There appears to be little to choose between the two readings, but
that of the text is cert^nly the more authoritative. Cf. SotmaU
ixvii.U. 11-13:

" Which like a jewel hung in ghastly night.
Makes black night hideous and her old face new."
S3. In older versions of the story Romeo seises her left hand
while Mcrcutio holds the righL
86 H. Forcorresponding lines in the Dutch play, see Appendix C.
B7. uihat dares, haw dares. Cf. Venju and Adonit, 950 : " What
may a heavy groan advantage thee?" Theobald, foUowed by some
modern editors, puQctuates, What! darei. etc

GS. antk face. Tybalt refers to the mask which Romeo had
donned; "a grinning face, such as merry-andrewB wear"
(Deiius&gt;

fid. sotemnitj/. See Glossary.

A4. iruspite, "only to defy and provoke us" (Schmidt). Cf.
i. 1. h5, above.

68. portly, "of a good deportment, well-behaved, well-bred"
(Silimidt).

78. This little incident seizes to bring out clearly the contrast
between Old Capuiet and his fiery nephew. With the same bitter
hatred of the Montagues that controls Tybalt, the uncle is held in
check by his regard for the laws of hospitality.

81. mend my soul, amend or save my soul. Cf. Ai Yon Like
It, iv. 1. 193 ; ■' by roy troth, and in good earnest, and so God
mend me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous."

83&gt; se( cock-a-hoop, set ail by the ears. Though a great deal
has been written about the last word, its etymology is still doubtfuL
See article on the subject in N. E. D.

87. contrary, cross, act in opposition to. The verb is fairly
common among EIiiiaI&gt;ethaD writers.



142 ROMEO AND JULIET IAot Two

91. patience perforce, enduraace of irremediable ills; a, pro-
verbial expression.

91. convert. Lettsom takes iweef aa a substantive, and convert
as a transitive verb, but the latter was frequently used Intransi'
tively ; cf. Lacrece, 592: "Stones dissolved to water do convert."

96-108. Note tbe Shaliespearian sonnet-structure of the lines.
Cf. note on i. 2. 4S-5I, above.

96. fine. Emended by Theobald from the older tin or tinne ;
Herford and Dowden retain the original reading. The present text
would pve the meaning of "pleasing punishment" However,
Dowdea expltuns siD, "To touch Juliet at all is sinj but the
profanation with Romeo's hand is a rough sin ; to touch with his
lips is 'the gentle sin.'"

IM. pilgrim. Halli well- Phillips priuts a cut from Inigo Jones,
a famous Elizal&gt;ethan architect and coadjutor of Ben Jonson,
showing the acted Romeo in this scene attired in pilgrim's garb.
This was a conventional disguise, and is employed to-day in the
acting of The Winter's Tak. iv. 4, by King Polixenes and CamiUo.

112. by the book, according to rule.

119. chinks, used colloquially as a term for money.

120. The Cambridge editors doubt the genuineness of this line,
tnit vf. Brooiie at this point, 1. 335 : " Thus hath his foe in choice
to give him life or death." Note the word-play in aecounl and
ihbt.

124. banquet. Here the meaning is " dessert," a course of
sweetmeats, fruit and wine; cf. Timan of Aihtn*, i. 2. 160:
" Ladies, an idle banquet attends you."

126. /* it e'en so? According to the old stage-directions they
" whisper In his ear " probably the reason for their departure,

142. prodigious, portentous; cf. A Midtwmmer Night'M Drtam,
T. 1. 419: " Nor mark prodigious. "



ACT II. PROLOGUE

Id tlie original editions the play is not divided into acts and
scenes, and some editors of the play prefer to place this prologfue
at the end of Act i, rather than at the be^nning of the second act.
It really makes no material difference. Since the Hues are so com-
monplace and serve so little dramatic purpose, it is seriously ques-
tioned whether they were written by Shakespeare. Like the
Prologue to Act i, the lines are in sonnet form.



ScEME Om] NOTES I*S

3. fair, Steercns reads it as s dissyllable, and omits the for,
but emendatioii is unnecessary. Fair signifies a beautiful woman,
a common meaning for the word in Shakespeare and as late as the
eighteenth century.

for which love groaned /or. Such duplications of a preposi-
tion are common in Elizabethan literature ; cf. At Yoa LOk It, ii.
T. 138 J " The scene wherein we play in."



This short scene shows Romeo's escape ttora his friends into

Capulet's garden. It also occupies time between Capiilet's feast
and Juliet's soliloquy after retiring the same night, Benvolio again
serves as foil to Mercutio.

2. dull earth, figurative for Romeo's body, the centre of which
\s his heart, lost to Juliet

C. orchard, garden. So in J1d^^u Crsiar, iii. 3. 353, Antony
speaks of Ctesar's gardens as his "new-planted orchards." But
Capulet's garden contains fruit-trees, as ii. 3. 108 shows.

6. conjure. Here we accent the first syllable of the word, but
&lt; in L 33 the last syllable. In Elizabethan English the modem dis-
tinction in meaning between the two pronunciations of this word
did not exist.

13. Adam Cupid. Qq. Ff. read Jhraham Cupid or Abraham:
Cupid. Upton proposed the emendation, which has been accepted
by most editors. Cupid is given the nickname Adam because of
his likeness to another famous archer, Adam Bell, celebrated in
ballad poetry, and bearing many points of resemblance to Robin
Hood. In Much Ado, i. 1 . 360, just after alluding to "blind Cupid,"
Benedick cries, " Shoot at me ; and he that hits me, let him be
clapped on the shoulder, and called Adam," But it is not certain
that the reading of all the earlier editions is wrong. Neilson pre-
fers it, Dowden is uncertain. Some topical allusion now lost may
lie in the name. Again, as White shows, •' aubum " was some-
times spelled oAruR, ahran, altram, and even Abraham. Thus the
meaning may be " the hght-haired Cupid."

14. Kirig Cophetua, an allusion to another contemporary ballad,
King Cophelna and the Beggar Maid, to be found complete in
Percy's Beliqiut, and again referred to in Love'a Lahour'i Lost, i. 3,
114 : '* Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and che Bc^ar? "
One staoia runs :



144 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

" The blinded boy that shoob so trim

From heaven down did hie.

He drew a. dart and shot at him.

In place where he did lye."

This makes certain the reading trim in L 13, above, which is
adopted from Q 1, as opposed to thefrtM of other Qq.

16. ape, a word used with a connotation of tenderness as ap-
phed to young men, in much the same way as the Nurse uses fool,
i. 3, 31, above. Nash writes of the time " when I was a little ape
at Cambridge."

24. circle, a magician's ring. Cf. Aa ¥ou Like It, U. 5. 68: " T ifi
a Greeic invocation to call fools into a circle."

31. To be associated with the moist or humid night. Humour-
OUB, of course, contains a word-play ; cf. I. 7, above.

40. field-bed. Mercutio means the ground : he says he would
prefer the small comfort of a trund!e-bed. It is worth noting thai
in Brooke the Nurse brings a real fietd-bed into Juliet's chamber.



SCENE 2

On account of the marvellous poetic beauty of the lines, the per-
sonal charms of Juliet, and the perfect setting in a moon-lit Italian
garden, this •• balcony scene " is with readers of the play as weQ
as tlieatre-goers the most popular of the whole drama. In it the
heroine inadvertently reveals her love to Romeo, but is too frank
by nature to unsay any of her speeches when she finds that they
have been overheard. A? a result the lovers at once plan mar-
riage, despite each one's presentiment that all will not go well with

2. Fuller sees here again the influence of the 1560{?) English
play which served as a prototype for the Dutch play of Stniys. See
Appendix 0.

7. her maid, a votary of Diana.

8. sick and green, Q 1 reads " pale and green," which Collier
would emend to " white and green," on the ground that these
were the colors worn by Elizabethan court fools. The change is
scarcely justifiable, the meaning of the phrase being rather " chlo-
rotic," as Schmidt defines it.

16. two of the fairest stars. Fuller compares Romeo's words
to those of Phebidas (Mercutio) in the Dutch play : " Her two



Scene Two] NOTES 1*5

eyes I saw sparkle as gleam Castor and Pollux on high." Cf. also
i, 5. 46, above.

24. that I uwe a glove. According to Dr. Fuller thia conceit,
like several others in the play, is a characteristic Fetrarchism. and
is fouod in many contemporary sonnets written by the English imi-
tators of Petrarch. Conceits are abundant in Romeo's sp^etjhes
throughout this scene, but they are generally absent from Juliet's,
whose language from the outset is more direct than that of her

25. Ayme! See noteon i I. 16T, and cf. ii. 1. 10. above.
81-2. The same figure is in Macbeth, i. 1. S3-3, •■ heaven's

cherubin, horsed Up^n the sightless couriers of the air,"

31. lazy-pacing. Pope's restoration from Q 1. Is it not a better
reading than the laae-puffitig of other Qq Ff F

89. Malone prefers to place the comma after though and take
the latter word in its sense of " however." Most editors accept
the present reading. By clianglng his hateful name he will lose
none of his personality.

42. belonging to a man. For metre, see Appendix D.

46. owe, own. possess. Cf. The Cnimdy of Errors, iii. 1, 48,
" keepest me out from the house I owe."

S3, counsel, secrets, as frequently in Shakespeare and older
English.

66. deat saint. He is thinking of the conversation they hare
bad a few minutes ago in Capulet's hall.

61. dislihe. For the impersonal use cf. Abbott, § 29r, and see
note on i. 3. 96, aiwve,

64. Note Juliet's care for her lover's safety.

89. lei, stop, obstacle ; as in thefamiliar legal phrase. " without
let or hindrance."

76, but thou love. The first word means "eneept." Malone is
clearly mistaken in interpreting the line, " And so thou do but
love rae, I care not what may befelL "

78. wanting of. On the use of the preposition with certain
participles which are considered verbal nouns, compare Abbott.
jlTB.

B3. In this imaginative passage lies a great deal of the feeling
that prompted Francis Drake and other sixteenth-century voyagers,

84. adventure, venture, dare.

Fuller compares Romeo's love-making in Struijs, translating :
"Thou, O Goddess, art the sole beacon towards which I sail. Wilt
thou uupityingly withhold thy light from ray eye, then must m-



1*6 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

ship, to my ruin, perish ; far unless some haven be at hand, its
^Ight will sink to the deprhs."

89. farewell compliment, away with conventionalities !

93. at lovers' perjuries . . . Jofe louirAs. a common proverb of
the time, found in Marlowe's translation of Ovid, and several times
in the writings of Robert Greene.

101. to be strange, to appear shy, reserved. Steevens quotes
Greene's Mammtlia (1583): " Is it the fashioD in Padua to t&gt;e so
strange with your friends ? "

106. discovered, uncovered, revealed ; the usual meaning in
early English. Cf iii. I. 141, below.

dark night. Note the quibble with light above.

107. by yonder blessed moon. Similarly in Richard III, iv. 4,
S66 ; Richard, wooing the Princess Elizabeth through her mother,
probers several oaths, all of which are rejected as insufScient sure-
ties of his truth. In The Merchant of Verity, v. 1. 148, Gratiano
swears '• by yonder moon. "and in the same scene Bassaoio, taking
Portia's eyes for his byword, is answered, 345-6 :



116. Fuller shows that Juliet's presentiment of coming ill at thU
point oC(;urs in Struijs.

117. contract. For the accent see Appendix D.

119, 120. In A Midsummer A'ight't Dream, I 1. US, the joys
resulting from love are said to be :

" Brief as the lightning in the collied night.
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth.
And ere a man have power to say, ' Behold 1 '
The jaws of darkness do devour it up."

131. Jroni^, generous i as in King Lear, iiL 4. 80: "Yonc old
kind iMher, whose ^nk heart gave all."
133-6. Cf. Juliet's words, ii. 6. 82-4, below.
139. / am afeard. One should not overlook these frequent

presentiments of coming disaster, nor forget that the audience,
knowing the story beforehand, would understand them in the way
they were intended.

112-8. It is Juliet that takes the initiative. The words of this
speech are adopted almost directly from Brooke, but there is al&gt;out
them a refinement, a delicacy, not found in the poem.



ScEKE Thhee] notes 147

ISl. By and by, iramediatelf. The phrase to-da; signifies a
longer wait.

162. suit. This is Malone's emendation from the older »trife,
and is made practically certain by the corresponding passage in
Brooke, " to cease your suit."

108. A similar picture is jfiven in As Yoh Like It, ». 7. 146-T, of
the schoolboy '• creeping like snail unwillingly to sthooL"

162 fl. Fuller calls attention to the corresponding scene in
Strugs, where Romeo thus addresses the night : '■ Come, thou dark
shroud, as is thy wont, and cover with thy shadow the half of this
worid's orb ; while I in lonely gloom make echo rewail my own la-
ment, in the innermost of Venus' temple, where my Juliette is."

167- attending, listening, attentive ; as in Tilus Andronina,
V. 3. B2 : " He did discourse To luve-sick Dido's sad attending ear."

178. wanton. See Glossary.

1B9. ghostly. See Glossary.

190. dear hap, i. t. good happening, good fortune.



SCENE 3

The Friar reluctantly promises to officiate at a secret wedding, in
order to reconcilethe hostile faroilies. His long soliloquy, showing
his knowledge of herbs " and their true qualities." makes more
plausible his suggestion to Juliet of the sleeping potion in iv, 1.

1, Puller argues that Shakespeare is directly Indebted here to
the English prototjTie of Struijs. In the latter play immediately
after a scene in which Romeo takes leave of Juliet at break of day,
the Friar is discovered in front of his cell soliloquizing : *' The black
turtaiuB of heaven's dome fall down towards the west, letting the
eastern sky grow pleasant with light The messenger of the sun
begins to color the horison afieryglow. Each bird draws out its
head from under its wing and hops from branch to branch, and
with its sweet voice sings the praise of God." His meditations
are interrupted by the entrance of Romeo. There is nothing to
suggest this in Brooke or in Fainter.

1-6. A profitable study might be made of Shakespeare's descrip-
tions of the early morning. Cf.. for example, i. 1. 135 ff., above i
iii. 5. 7-10, below ; Juliut Catar, ii. 1, 101 ff. ; Rattdtt, i. 1. 166-T ;
jtfuoA Ado, r. 3. 35-7 ; Sonneti, vii, xixiii. xijiiT.

2. chequering, i. e. the lights and shadows resembled a checkd
board. Milton's " chequered shade " carries the same figure.



148 ROMEO AND JULIET (Act Tw»

3. darkness like a drunkard reels. In Sonnelt, vii. 9-10, it is
the sun at its setting that '■ from highmost pitth, with weary cm,
like feeble age , . . reeleth from the day. "

7. osier cage of ours, this basket belonging to the order. The
Franciscans held all their property in common.

0-10. Compare Milton'a Poradi«« iotri, ii. 911 ! "Thewombof
nature and perhaps her grave."

32. sometimes. Capell reads tometiTne'a,

85. that pari. Either the odorous part of the flower, or else the
part of the body that one smells with.

37. encamp them still, are always encamped For other in-
Blances of verbs used reflexively, see Abbott, § 296.

28. grace and rude will. Such a theological reference would be
more intelligible to an Elixabethan audience than to one to-day.
They mean about the same as "virtue" and " evil desires. " Spoken
by the Friar these reflections seem thoroughly in character.

SB. worser, not an infrequent form in Shakespeare^ It ocmin
again, iil 9. 108, below.

30, conker. See Glossary.

Enter Romeo. Early editions place his entrance after I. B8.

SI. In Struijs the Friar replies to Romeo's salutation: "Dm
ffraiiai, my son. What brings thee het« so early ? This strikes me
as most strange."

37. unbrmsed, undamaged, uninjured; unstuff'd, not .too
heavily kiaded.

61. both our remedies, a remedy for both of us. See Abbott,
} J19, and cf. Ilamltt, iii. 1. 4S, " both your honours," i. &lt;- " the
honor of both of ynu."

62. lies. For the form see Abbott, § 335. The singiflar is em-
ployed because the verb precedes its subject as in i. 1. 38, above.

64. steads, assists, serves. Cf. Tlie Merchant of Vvnic*, L 3. T :
" May you stead me ? "

66. homely in thy drift, plain in your speech.

68. The conventional Elizabethan • ' debate " between hearli and
a/M is discussed at length by Professor J. H. Hanford in Modtm
Lan^aagt Nbta, xxvi, 161-5. Compare the correspondence in Th4
nation (New York), for Mar^h 30 and April 91, ISll. Shakespeare
particularly alludes to this del&gt;ate in SonneU, xlvi, xtvii, ^d cxii,
and again in The Merchant of Vemee, iii. 3. 63 ff. In general, love
of the eyes seems to indicate mere fancy, and love of the heart,
genuine affection. See also i. 3. 92, above.

78. season love. Shakespeare uses the satae figure again in



Scene Fonii] NOTES 14»

A II 'a Welt, i. 1 . 55, where the Couotess declares tears to be " the
best brine a maiden can season her praise in."

76. yet. As the rhyme indicates, the pronunciation was *' yiL"
This was the regular spelling in the time of Chaucer.

88. read by rote, you knew only a few phrases learned by heart,
and had not been taught the real meaning of love.

90. in one respect, on one t'onsideration, which is named In tbe

92. to turn, as to turn. See Abbott, § 381.

93. stand on sudden haste, must be in great haste.



SCENE 4.

This scene, which in time closely fallows the last, occupying a
slightly later hour of the morning after Capulet's feast, is struc-
turally divided at the point where the Nurse enters. The objecta
of the first half are to show the transformation wrought in Romeo
by Juliet's love and to tell of the challenge sent to him by Tybalt
The second part completes arrangements for the wedding. Much
of tlie scene is satire directed against contemporary Englishmen
who affect Italianate methods of dueling.

2. to-night, last night ; another illustration of the usage is in
i. 4. SO, above.

12. dares . . . dared, a mere quibble ; the first means "chal-
lenges," the second, " ventured."

16. thorough, another spelling of the preposition l/trovsh.

pin, centre ; a term from archery. " The clout, or white mark
at which arrows were diret'ted, was fastened by a black pin placed
in the centre" (Malone). Cf Lov^'i Lahour't Lost, iv. 1. 138:
" Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin."

19. prince of cats, a play on Tybalt's name. Sir Tybert, an-
other form of the worl, is the name of the cat in the beast-fable of

Tit^nard Iki Fox. Parallel passages have been cited from Dekker,
Salirtnniutix {1 603) : " The' you were Tybert, the long-tail'd prince
of cats"; and Nash, Have with You to Saffron WakUa (IS96):

- Not Tybalt, prince of cats." '

20. Mptain of complements. He knows all the formalities of
dueling. Compare it. 9. S9, above. The modem distinction in
spelling and sense between complinMtit and compUmfnl did not
exist In the sixteenth century.



ISO ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

21-2. time, distance, and proportion. Sleevens quotes from
Jonson, Enery Man in Hi» Hamonr, i. 4. where Bobndil is teaching
Matthew to fence ; " Note your distance, keep your due proportion
of time."

22. resti me. Me is the meaningless " ethical dative," of irbich
further examples are given by Abbott, 5 220.

24. butcher of a silk button., Staunton cites Silver's Paradoxu
of Defence (USS) : "Thou that takest upon thee to hit anie Eng-
lishman with a thrust upon anie button."

26. &lt;&gt;f the very first house, of the first rank, probably; though.
as Dyce shows, the phrase was sometimes used of upstart gentle-

26. first (end second cause, i. e. of the quarrel. In A* You
Like It, V, i. 70 ff.. Touchstone enumerates the seven causes or de-
grees of quarreling " by the book." In Jonson's The AtchemUt,
Kastril, a country boy, willingly pays Subtle for instruction in the
art of quarreling. Throughout Europe in Shakespeare's time the
practice of dueling prevailed so (commonly that works like the
treatises of Saviolo and Caranza were written as guide-books to the
science, and schools were established for the teaching of its fine
points. In England especially the practice had been introduced
along with other vicious customs from Italy ; three " Italian teachers
of offence " are s^d to have been living in London by 1599. The
terms pataada, a thrust, ptmlo revtrto, a t»ack-handed stroke, Aaj,
a home-thrust, which are explained in the Glossary, are of Italian
origin. Mercutio's ridicule is directed not against the practice of
dueling, of which he himself is an adept, but against the study of it
in these Italianate schools. Of course, Mercutio speaks not as a
Veronese, but as an Elizabethan Londoner, and his hits at a local
fashion are not lost on his audience.

20. affecting, aifectcd, using affectation. Cf. Merry Wiitet, il. I.
145 ! '• I never heard such a drawling, affecting rojfue."

31. fall, valiant, sturdy ; a frequent sense in Shakespeare.

83. grandsire. Mercutio addresses the sober Benvolio as one
of an elder generation who has known better times.

84. flies. The term is enplained in the words that follow it
Dowden notes that Hamlet calls the shallow Osric a " water-fly "
in Hamlet, v. S, Si, while courtiers are denominated " gilded Init-
tei-flies " in Lear, r. 3. 13.

35. perdona mi's, Italian for "pardon-rae's." Qq. 4, 5 rend
fardowi--meee, Q 2 has pardons meest F pnrdon-mte'a. Theobald
emended to 'pardonnex-moui, which is accepted by many editors as



ScEHE FoDii] NOTES ISX

a hit at the Frenchified fashions of Bn§;IishnieD. The Cambridge
editors, however, believe that the present reading is In harmony
with the Italian terms, a few lines above.

36. jotm. Remembering that this word is sometimes used of a
long bench with no back, note the quibble with the word beach in
the line just below.

37. hones, the reading of Qq. F. but some editors follow Theo-
bald in emending to bon'a, the French word that men shouted on
seeing a good stroke.

39. without his we- Some suggest that this means that Romeo
has lost his roe. or female deer (dear) ; others, that the first sylla-
ble of his name is gone, leaving only '■ me O ! " or " O me ! " the
sigh. In either case Mercutio's pun is far-fetched.

46. grey eye or so. Thisbe was rather handsome, but that is
□either here nor there. Such is the general meaning of the pas-
sage. Grey eyes were then greatly admired, but whether or not
the color was the same as the word now indicates, is a disputed

47-8. gave us the counterfeit. Halli well-Phillips quotea
Nash's Jack Wilton (1594): "Aie me shee was but a counterfeit
slip, for she , . . gave me the slip"; and Guilpin's Sldalelheia
(1598) : " la he not fond then which a slip receaves For currant
money P"

65. strain courtesy. Note the word-play with eonatraim eovrt'tg,
below.

60. kindly, " naturally, in a manner suited to the character or
occasion, pertinently " (Schmidt).

64. flowered. His dancing shoe was piuked, that is, perfo-
rated. Cf. Henry VIII. v. 4. 50, " railed npon me tUl her pinked
porringer fell off her head."

66-70. Puns are in abundance here. Romeo is to folloin, i. ».
to ponder over the joke till he has worn tmt his shoe, that when its
rittgU lole is worn, the joke alone may remain. SinpZii, besides its
present meaning, may have the sense of simple, silly ; another
quibble lies lietween iot» and muZ. So Romeo's reply means that
Mercutio's jest is absolutely alone in its kind for silliness. On
linffle-eoled Matone quotes Holinshed's Ireland, p. 93 : "A means
tower might sewe such single-soale kings as were at that time in
IrelaDd" Literally the word means " having but a singlft sole,"
hence exceedingly poor, then mean, contemptible, as here.

73. Romeo advises Mercutio to urge on his fainting wits wi(^
fwHeh and jrpur, or else acknowledge defeat in the wit-combat. On '



152 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Tw

wilt, I, T2, cf. note on L 4. 47, above. Some editon follow Q 1 in
reading viittfail.

75. wild-goose chase. AccordinR to Dyce, the name was oiig-
inally applied to one kind of horse rai^e, in which the horses were
etsrted to)(ether, the rider who gained the lead forcing the other to
follow hira wherever he chose to go.

78. Was I with you, etc. Did my remark about the goose bit
you?

81. bile . . . by tA««ai', an expression of endearment (Schmidt),

8S. goad goose, bile not, a proverb of the day, found in Ray's
collection.

91. broml goose. The pun may have some refereoce to a brood,
or breeding, goose, as broad was often spelled bnode or brood. It
may mean an obvious goose, or an unrestrained goose. Deliusand
Collier prefer thereadmgof ¥, abroad, construing it, " &amp;r and wide
abroad — goose. "

B3-4. now art thou Romeo. Cf.i. 1.304: "This is not Romeo,
he 's some other where," The transformation noted by Mercutio
must he apparent to every reader. The development of Roruea's
character is perhaps the most interesting theme for study in tht
whole play, but he does not reaeh full maturity until the news
is brought to him of Juliet's supposed death.

98. natural, idiot, fool. So As Yoa Like It, i. 2, 57 : [Nature]
" hath sent this natural for our whetstone."

112. Mg fart, Peter. Fans were large enough in those days for
ladies of quality, and those like the Nurse, who aped them, to hare
special fan-bearers, Cf. Love'a LaJx/ur'i Loit, It. 1. 14T : " To
see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan,"

116. God ge good morrow, God give you a good momiDg; a
form of salute used only by the lower classes to their superiora.
Of course Mercutio employs a similar form in reply only for the
purpose of mocking the old Nurse, Qood den, as explained in
n, note to i. 2. 58, is the contraction for " Good evening," This
latter salutation was then used, as it is in rural England and in the
Southern states to-day, at any time after noon.

131-2. God hath made for himself to mar. Qq, followed b}
some modem editors, omit the /or. The Nurse's reply as well as I'lO
sense of the passage makes the emendation very plausible. See
note on i. 3, 13 above.

183. confidence. The Nurse's blunder for Bonferme*. Cf-
■Mtrry Wivei. i. 4. 173 : " I will tell your worship more of the wart
the next time we have confidence." In llueh Ado, Ui. &amp;. % Dog-



Scene Fii^J NOTES 153

beriy mokes the sAme blunder. ** I would have some coDlidence
with you that detems you nearly."

136. indite, invite. Benvolio possesses some sense of humor.

136. So bo ! the cry of the sportsman when he starts a hate.
So Romeo immediately inquires what game has been found.

151, " lady, lady, lady." Mercutio is singing the refrain to Su~
tanna. a ballad licensed in 159S. In Taelfih JSight. ii. 3. S4., Sir Toby
sioffs the fltst line ! •' There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, Jady."
The full text of the ballad is preserved in Penny's Keiiqties.

103. saucy merchant, " impudent fellow ; merehant is used like
chap, a shortened form of chapman " (Dowden). Dyte t'ompares
The Fair Maid of Bristoin, (1605) : "What [sjaiisie merchant have
you got there ? "

169. laii&gt; on my side. Peter's boldness is on a par with that of
Sampson, i. 1. .54, above. It will be noted also that the Nurse
gives no vent to her indignation until Mercutio is safely out of
hearing.

180. weak. Perhaps the Nurse means «&gt;ick«d. Collier (MS ) so
smends the line.

201- cords made like a tackled stair, a rope ladder of the kind
QSed on shipboard.

SOS. mistress, a trisyllable. See Appendix D.

220. with a letter, with the same letter.

223. the dog's name. R. as reserablinjt a growl, was known from
ancient times as the dog's letter. It is so calltd in Ben Jonsoii's
Knp^lish grammar and in other works, and even gave rise to the
verb ame, to growl. Having heard .somethinft of this, the illiter-
ate Nurse takes as mockery the statement that R stands for Romeo.

226. rosemary. Symbolising remembrance, this flower was
much in fevor with lovers and at weddings. Cf. Hamlet, iv. S. ITS j
'• There "s rosemary, that 's for remembrance " ; and see iv. 5. T9,
below, for reference to its use at funerals.



SCENE S

This scene ^rthers the action but a very little. Emphasis is on
the humorous situation.

1. slruek nine. Note the carefulness with which the time is
marked at many points in the play. It was noon when the Nurse
was inquiring for Romeo in the last scene.



154 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Two

7. love, i. e. Venus.

13--&amp;. A figure borrowed from the game, of tennis.

16. The metre is broken here, the sense is seeroingly incom-
pletCi and the couplet following certainly looks Euspicious. Why
should Juliet say old folia . . , fiign a* they tuer* lUad? Or why
should Uad be called jia{«/ Collier's MS. suggested old folia teen
at dead, and substituted dull for jiaU. White conjectured that
tmaty faitie is a misprint for marry, fara. Keightley. though read-
ing dull for pale, cites Chaucer, TroUta and Crettadt, ii. : "With
AEshen pale as Icde." Pope oniits the entire couplet as interpolated

18. honeynuTse. Ci. 1 Henry IV, i. 2. 179: "my good sweet
honey lord."

23. them. The word n»\ea in Shakespeare's day was used as
either singular or plural.

26. give me leave awhile. Cf. i. 3. 7, and note. Q 1 reads U
me Teat, whiL-h amounts to the same thing.

36. stay the circumstance, wait for the de^nils. Cf. v. 3. 181,
beiaw, and Tiltit Andronimti, iv. 2. IMj "Tdl them both the cir
cumstance of alL "

U. flower of courtesy, perfection of courtesy. Cf. iL i. 61,

60. as. See Abbott, § lOT. " If is implied.

61. This line is spanned, No. 8, in Appendix D.

B6-9. This is sometimes regarded as a rude sort of verse and so
printed. Servants and ignorant persons often so speak in Eliu-
bethan dramas.

67. coil, hubbub, turmoil. So Tkt) Comedy of Errort, ilL 1. iS :
■■ What a coil is there, Droraio ? "

73. straight at any news. The meaning is clear enough without
resort to the emendations that have been proposed ; as, " straight-
way at my news " (Han mer), or "straight at ray next news"
(Walker). The Nurse makes a general comment oa Juliet's habit
of blushing on slight provocatioa.

SCENE 6

A short scene marks the last upward staftc of the lovers' fortunes.
But the tragic foreshadowing is even more notable here than in
previous scenes.

This scene underwent apparently the most thorough revisioD be-
tween the writing of Q I and that of Q 3. The readings of Q 1 will
be found in Appendix A.



ScEKE Six] notes 155

S-8. The su^estion of these lines comes directly from Brooke ;
see Appendix B.

A similar note is somided in the conclusion of Browning's In a
Balcony, where Norbert and Constance are satisfied in the Tery
presence of "love-devouring death " (Mims).,

" Nor. This is Lte'a height.

. . . Men have died

Trying to find this place, which we have found."

" We are past h«rm now,
, . . This must end here:
It is too perfect."

&amp;-16. The Friar's calm words suggest a passage in Wordsworth's



" Be taught, faithful Consort, to control
Rebelhous passion; for the goda approve
The depth, and not the tiimuit, of the soul;
A fervent, not ungovernBble, love.
Thy transports moderate."

Some critics 'find in the Friar's speech the keynote of the entire
play, and think that Shakespeare intended it as a moral lesson, a
warning against the dangers of violelit love and violent hatred. All
that we know of the dramatist and the way that he worked, ren-
ders such an opinion untenable (Mims).

9. violent . . . violent. On the pronunciation see Appendix D.

10. like fire and powdet. The Friar uses the same simile again
m iii. 3. 139, below.

12. his, its. The tatter word became fixed as the possessive
of it aiter the time of Shakespeare. As in the King James version
of the Bible, the regular neuter possessive form was his, though
it was occasionally employed. See Abbott, f 229.

13. confounds, destroys, ruins. Cf. confusion = destruction, in
iv. 5. 65, below.

17. Is not the reading of Q 1 better: "So light of toote nere
hurti the troden flower " ? The idea is a familiar one in poetry ;
it is found, for example, in Scott's Lady of the Lake and Tenny-
son's ^oud (Mims).

21. confessor. Accented con'fetror, ; see Appendix D.



156 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thus

26. that. For the use of this conjunction where modern English
requires the repetition of i(, cf. Abbott, g 385.

30. conceit. See Glossary.

32. Steevens notes the same sentinent repeated in Antony ani
Cleopatra, L i. 15; "There's beggars- in the love that can be
. reckoned." t

34. sum up sum of half my wealth. The usual quibhta
BmendatioTis have often been proposed, but they seem unnecessary.
Staunton gives a reasonable interpretation : " 1 cannot Bum up
the sum, ortotai, of half my wealth. "



ACT III - SCENE 1

Here the plot reaches a turning-point. The chance meeting oa
a warm day of Tybalt and Mercutio, hot-headed repcesentatives of
the opposing houses, together with Mercutio's misinterpretation of
Romeo's attitude, leads to an encounter in which Meroutio is slain.
Stung to revenge, Romeo fights and slays Ts'balt and is thereupon
banished. Thus for the first time the antagonistic forces gain s
victory, and the lovers' fortunes begin to detline.

4. these hot days. Reed cites Sir Thomas Smith's Common-
meallh of Englaiid (1593): '• For in the warme time people for the
most part be more unruly."

6. me, ethical dative j see note to ii. 4. S3, above.

9. drawer, i". e.. the waiter., Cf 1 Henry IV, ii. 4. 33: "I
question my puny drawer."

11. Clarke notes that this quiet retort gives point to the humoi
of Alercutio's lecturing the staid Bcnvolio on the sin of quarrel-



14. moved to be moody sounds like an echo of i. I. 8, above.

16. what to? Of course Beiivolio is asking what he is moved
to, and of course Mercutio's misunderstanding of the last word v
deliberate.

32. tutor me from, " teach me to avoid " (Rolfe).

41. gentlemen, a dissyllable ; see Appendix D.

42, It is frequently stated that the part home by Mereub'o in
this quarrel, and afterwards his death, are detmis original witb
Shakespeare, and are not given in any earlier version of the story.
Fuller shows (cf. Appeudii C) that in Struijs is a. scene ckiseir
resembling this, in which Phebidas, who corresponds to Mercutio
here, quarrels and fights with Thibout Romeo comes up and tries



Scene ObbJ NOTES 157

to part them, but at that instant Thibout thrusts at Phebidas and
stays him.

46. occasion, here alnntst ■■ cause.

49. consort. Mercutio is as usual looking for en opportunity to
quibble, and takes this word in the sense of a company of min-
strels — a concert

G2. zounds, an oath, meaning literally, '* By God's wounds."

GS. reason coldly, speak quietly, without anger.

63. The doubling of the negative, considered incorrect to-day,
was long thought to add emphasis to a statement. The pereonal
pronoun is often repeated at the end of a sentence. So Titttt An-
droiucoB, V. 3. 113 : " Alas, you know I am no vaunter, 1." Kittff
Lair, iL 2. lOt : •' He cannot flatter, he."

69. my man. Tybalt means "the man I am seeking," butMer-
cutio, quibbling as usual, wilfully takes the phrase in the sense of
■' my servant." and aihrms that Romeo is man enough to follow
Tybalt to the field for a fight.

63. hate I bear thee, still another restoration by Pope from Ql.
Other early editions, followed by some modem, read lovt \a place

66. appertaining rage, rage appertaining to.
69. boy, a contemptuous use. Cf. i. 5. 79 and 85, above, and
V. 3. 70, below.

77. alia sloccata, another Italian fenring term, meaning a thrust
or stab with a rapier, but Mercutio applies the phrase to Tybalt,

carries it away, earries the victory, has the better. We still
speak ofeanyinff an election.

78. ral-caicheT, another allusion to his name. Cf. ii. 4. 19,
cbove, and corresponding note, and 1. 80, below.

will you walk ? Will you come aside with me ?

go. outrage, a trisyllable. See Appendix D, and cf. note on
entrance, i. i. S. above.

94. sped, •' dispatched, undone " (Schmidt). So M»rchattt of
Venice, ii. 9. 79: "So be gone i you are sped."

96-113. For the reading of corresponding lines in Q 1 , see Ap-
pendix A, IV.

102. grave man, a characteristic jest for the dying Mercubo.

peppered. Uterally covered " with wounds as thick as the par-
ticles of pepper sprinkled on a dish " (Webster). Mereutio means
that the one wound that he has received has been just as effective.
Cf. 1 H^nry IV, v. 3. 37 ! "I have led my ragamuffins where they
ate peppered."



158 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thbm

106, fights by the book of arithmetic, " tights by the rules of
the teachers of feofing," interprets DowJen, who compares ii. i.
BI-3, above. ,

109. What is the dramatic irony of this statement?

113. youT houses. "The ineffectual attempt to repeat hia |
formei" sentence, ■ A plague o' i&gt;oth your houses '.'... serves ex-
quisitely to indicate the faint speech of the dying man, and poet- i
ically to image his failing powers " (Clarke). I

114. ally, relative ; cf. 1. 194, below.

113. Hinsman, the reading of Q 1 ; many editors prefer the
eotiHn of Q 2, F.

122. aspired, used transitively, means not " attempted to
reach," but "actually reached, attained." Malone quotes Mar-
lowe's TambtiTiaiw (1590): "And both our souls aspire celestial
thrones."

128. respective lenity, considerate gentleness.

129. conduct. See Glossary.

ISO. amazed, in a maze, completely bewildered, as 5«quently
in Shakespeare.

141. fortune's fool. So the old King in Lear, iv. 8. 135, declares
himself " the natural fool of fortune." Hotspur in 1 Heniy /F,
V. 4. 81, exclaims : " Thought's the slave of Ufe and life's tUoe's
fool." I

148. manage, conduct, course.

164. I^dy Capulet is the first to demand revenge.

167 ft- Does Benvolio in this speech tell the whole truth, or is
he not endeavoring to smooth over Mercutio's part in the conflict?
In general the speech corresponds to that in L 1. 113 ff. Neither I
adds much to the play. Note BenvoUo's diction, his careful baUoc-
ing of adjectives and phrases. I

168. spoke him fair, talked kindly to blm. Cf. S Henry Yi. |
iv. 1. 120 : •' My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair." |

169. mce. See Glossary,.

162. (flfte (nice, "make peace "(Schmidt).
169. retorts, hurls back, the literal meaning of the word &lt; L»t
reloTquere, twist back.

176. by and by. Cf. note to ii. 2. 151, above.

194, My blood, etc. Mercutio is related to the Prince,



,,Goo^lc



SCENE 9

This scene, rich In lU poetry, is closely related to that following,
each scene showing from the standpoint of one of the lovt^rs tliat
the events of the day have made the catastrophe inevitable. The
chief in L-ident i[i the plot is the Nurse's suggestion looking toward
one more meeting of the lovers.

1 B. These lines are to be r^arded as Juliet's marriage hymn,
" differing in nothing from the legitimate epithalamium but ns
blank veree differs froro the rhymed stanza."

L Malone was the first to notice the close similarity of these
opening lines to passages in Bamaby Riche's FarirweU (1563) ; and
Marlowe's Edwnrd II (before 15.13). The first reads ; " The day to
his seeming passed away so slowely that he had thought the stately
steedes had bin tired that drawe the chariot of the Sunne, and
wished that Phteton had beene there with a whippe." So the

"Gallop apace, bright Phcebus, thruugb the akie.
And dusky night, in rusty iron ear;
Between you both, shorten the time, I pray.
That I may see that moat deseed day."

Even if such imitations were conscious on the part of Shakespeare,
he cannot be accused of plagiarism for making use of what he
found elsewhere. In his day literary men freely and openly bor-
rowed plots, expressions, and ideas from one another with no
thought of wrong-doing.

6. runaways' eges. The most difficult passage in the whole
play. Q2, Q3 readrunnaWBi/es; Q 4, Q 5, F 1 run-nwaya! ; F 2, F 3
run-awaks; F4 raii-aico;^?, all either singular or plural. The present
reading is that of the Olohe Shakespeare, which takes the first word
hi the sense of ramblers, or vagabonds, whose eyes, Juliet hopes,
will not be able to see Romeo at night. Although this reading is
ably supported by Prof. J. W. Hales in Lamfman'e Magaiine, Feb-
ruary, 1893, it has not been adopted by such recent editors of the
play as Herford. Dowden, and Neilson. For a full discussion of
the whole problem the student is referred to the Varionan (Fumess)
edition of the play. pp. SfiT-ftS, and to the authorities just cited.

It may be well here to summarise briefly the theories held \iy
various editors, and supported with great ingenuity. (1} Emendar-



160 BOMEO AND JULIET [Act Thki

tioas have been suggested as follows : rumourV. conjectured bj
Heath, and adopted by Hudson ; unaware*. cor^ecturedb^Jackara
and adopted by Knight (ed. 1), Collier (ed. 1), and Verplaack;
rud/t dai/'$, by Dyee and Chambers ; enemUt', by Collier (ed. S). etc.,
etc. On the other hand are those who keep the reading of Qq
and Ff. {3} Some of the latter (Delius. ^hmidt. and Dauiel)
make runnioivi plural, as in the Globe text, followed here. (3)
Others, reading runaway's, find in it a refereni-e to Cupid, Phaeton,
Night, Moon, Day, etc. If this reading be correct, perhaps the
atlusion to the sun, suggested by Warburton, and followed t?
Hudson, White. Dowden, and other editors, is the most plausible.
Juliet wishes that Phaeton were driving the sun's ehariot this day
at least, so that he might bring in night immediately. Then irith
the swiftness of her fancy she sees her wish already accomplishtd j
the sun has actually played the "runaway."

Dowdeti hesitatingly suggests a new pointing of the lines :

" Spread thy close curtain, iove-performing night !
— That [=jondcrI runaway's eyes may wink — and RomUk
Leap to these arms ! Untalk'd of and unseen, {

Lovers can see to do their ai



Neilson practically adopts this punctuation, reading :

" Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night.
That runaway's eyes may wink ; and, Romeo,
Leap to these arms ! Untalk'd of and unseen
Lovers can see to do their ai



9. Steevens compares here Milton's Comui:

"Virtue could see to do what Virtue would
By her own radiant light, though sua and Duxm
Were in the flat sea sunk."

Professor Wendell adds that the difference between the underljiig
thought of the two passages is characteristic of the diffeience
between Elizabethans and Puritans.

12. learn. See Glossary.

14. Hood my unmann'd blood. Terras in falconry are usrf
figuratively. A hawk was hooded until let fly at the game snd
was said to be unmann'd when not sufficiently acquainted with b«



ScEKE Two] NOTES 161

keeper. Whea the hood was token ofF, she bated, or fluttered
with her wings. The pun on the third word in this line is obvious.

15. Mack mantle. Cf. Brooke, 1. 451, *' wheo on earth the
Night her mantle black hath spread." See ii. 3. 7a, above.

strange loue. Cf. ii. 8. lOl. Similarly in AU'i WM, v. 3. 169 :
"Why do you look so strange upon your wife?"

21^6. The most pronounced conceits in which Juliet indulges
are found in this and succeeding' passages in this scene.

2S. In connectiOD with this whole soliloquy Mrs. Jameson's
words should be read, giving, as they do, a woman's impression of
JuUet's innate purity of mind. " Let it be remembered that in this
speech Juliet is not supposed to be addressing an audience, nor
even a confidante ; and I (Confess I have been often shocked at the
utterwantoftasteand refinery in those who, with coarse derision, or
in a spirit of prudery, yet more gross and perverse, have dared to
comment on this beautifiit ' Hymn to the Night,' breathed out by
Juliet in the silence and solitude of her chamber. She is thinking
aloud; it is the young heart 'triumphing to itself in words.' In
the midst of ail the vehemence with which she calls upon the night
to bring Romeo to her arms, there is something so almost infantine
in her perfect simplicity, so playful and.fantaistie in the imagery
and language, that the charm of sentiment and innocence is thrown
over the whole."

46. /, a play on ape and eye, both spelled frequently with the
single vowel.

47. death-dealing eye of cockatrice, a beast seemingly identi-
cal with the basilisk, whose power is thus described in Warner's
AlMon'i EnffkiTtd (15S6) :

" ^sculap an herdauian did espie
That did with easy sight enforce a basilisk to flye
Albeit naturally that beast doth murlher with the eye."

So also lUchard III, iv. 1. 55-6 :



S3. God save the mark I Used similarly after the mention of
voandi, 1 Henri/ IV, i. 3. S6. Professor Kittredge in Wordi and
their Wayi compares the Latin abiit omen used by the Romans
"when they found it necessary to meution an unlucky or disas-



162 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thhee

trous thing. * God save the mark ' is the Nurse's interjectioD when
she describes the wound id Tybalt's breast and touches her own
body \a significant ((esture. Our * Don't speak of it ! ' gives vague
expression tu the same feeling." For mark Q 1 reads lampU,

66. gore blood, clotted blood, as in the anonymous play of
Stlimut (1595): "Color my strong hands with his gore blood."

swaunded, swooned. Compare the vulgar" drowndcd " of to-day.

67-60. For reading of Q 1 see Appendix A. IV.

61, contTary. For accentuation see Appendix D.

69- Since Romeo is banished, why does not Juliet go with him?
In Brooke's poem this course is suggested by Juliet, but Ronteo
tells her that if she does go she will undo both of them because her
father will certainly pursue and overtake the cnuple and vent on
them his wrath. Shakespeare in condensing the story ignored this
incident.

73. Possibly a reference to the serpent in the Garden of Eden,
which, according to one popular legend, had the head and face ot s
beautiful woman. See Skeat's CmnpleU Worka of Chaaeer, voL T.
p. 153, for an interesting note on the subject.

74. dragon keep so fair a cave, an allusion to the talc familiu
b Germanic folklore of a'cave filled with treasure and guarded by
a dragon. The best-known forms of this tale are in the Middle
High German Niebetangenlied, and in the hero's last adventure re-
counted in the Anglo-Saxon poem, Beovndf.

76-78. Cf. Romeo's paradoxical language, i. 1. 181 ff.
83-4. book . . . So fairly bound. We have already noted the
same conceit, further elaborated in i. 3. 81 ff.
86-6. Cf. Fletcher, Tlu WUdr-Ooot&gt; Chiue {c. 1631) ii. 1, 161-i,

a?"

87. naught, wicked ; cf. Lear, ii. 4. ]30 : " Beloved Regan, thy
sister's naught."

The line is scanned. No. 9, in Appendix D.

90. BUsler'dbe thg tongue. In Brooke, 11. U*S-6, Juliet aftei
■ctusing Romeus becomes " wroth with herself," and soliloquiies ;

f ' Ah cruel murdering tongue, raurderer of others' larae.
How durst thou once attempt to touch the honour of his name?''

Shakespeare, by a characteristic stroke of art, turns her indignatioD
on the Nurse's tongue instead of on her own.



ScEME Three] NOTES 163

93. Here, na Steeveos points out,' Shakespeare Is possibly In-
debted to the account id Pamter'a Palara of Pleagure : " Is it pos-
sible that UDd«r suc-h beautie and rare coinelinesse, disloyaltie and
treason may have their siedge and lodging ? " Sledge is an old word
for "seat."

S8. poor mg lord. Possessive adjectives, when unemphatic, are
soraetinies transposed, being really combined with nouns. Cf.
Abbott, S 13, and iii. 5. 200, below.

AinoofA, speak kindly of, flutter. Probably a quibble lies between
this word and manffU, which sometimes to smooth linen, but here
means tear, dismember.

108, woTser. Cf. note on iL 3. 99, above.

114. slain fen thousand Tpbalts, is " worse thiui the loss of
ten thousand Tybalts " (Mason).

114, 116, 117, 118, 12L Note the consistent figure of an army
on the march.

ISO. modern, ordinary-

121. Tearward. Another pun on this and rear word is doubt-
less intended.

143. my true knight. Romeus is frequently termed a knight id

The Nurse plays the same part for Juliet here that the friar does
for Romeo in the next scene. In this passage she certainly shows
good sense and courage.

SCENE 3

The sympathetic Friar suggests a solution of thdr difficulties
which promises ultimate huppiness to the lovers, and he also
arranges for their farewell meeting. Thus an important puipose of
the scene is to add an element of suspense to the plot.

8-S. Even the Friar uses conceits ; tf. L (*3, below.

10. vanith'd, a verypeculiaruseoftheword.asKeightleypoints
ouL He suggests "issued, or some word of similar meaning."
Dowden adds : *' I suspect that banishment in the next line misled
the printer; but possibly (and it is strange that this has not been
suggested) Shakespeare wrote, ' A gentler judgment — " banish'd "
— from his lips.'" In support of Dowden's first suggestion it may
be noted that in the Second Quarto the word namtht is placed ex-
actly above Aant»A-nient letter for letter.

IS. banishment. Romeo rings the changes on this word just as
Juliet does in the preceding scene.



l64 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Tbue

38. rusKd. Capell suggests pmKd and Collier bnah'd.

39. Steeveiui quotes Diyden, Palamtya aad Areite, for a Bimilu

" Heaven is not, but where Emily abides.
And where she 's absent all is hell besides."

88. validity, value. So Ali't W,n that Endt WM, v. 3. 198:
"this ring.
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel."

84. courlship. According to Schftiidt the two meaninga d
** courtliuess, civility." and "courting, wooing," blend into ooe
here and in Am ¥m Like It, iii. 8. 364 : ■&lt; an inland man, one thu
knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love."

38. who. For this form of the relative used of inanimate pe^
sons and objects regarded as persons, where nwdern English re-
quires wAteA, cf. note on i. 1. 119, and see Abbott, §264.

U. This line.certainl; (rom a poetic standpointone of theworst
In Shakespeare, has given editors much trouble on account of evi-
dent confusion in the printing oF it and of those that follow io tbt
early editipns. Q i, the authoritative text, reads :

" This may flyes do, when I from this must flie.
And sayest thou yet, that exile Is not death ?
But Romeo may not. he is banished.
Flies may do this, but I from this must Sie :
Tliey are freemen, but I am banished."

Q 1 omits IL 38-39, and runs ;

"And steale immortall kisses from her lips; '
But Borneo may not, he is banished.
Flies may doo this, but I from this must flye."

F 1 arranges the lines i

"This may Flies doe, when I from thb must flie.
And, saist thou yet, that exile b not death ?
But Romeo may not, hee is banished."

The reading of the present tent is that first proposed by Steeveo
and has proved generally acceptable to editors.



ScEN« Theee] notes 165

4B. mean. This form is used here for the sake of the pun, but
It is found elsewhere in Shakespeare, as in J Htnry VI, iiL 2. 10 t
"Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city."

51-6. armauT. . . . mUk. Tlie figure changes here ( it is not a
clear i.'ase of mixed metaphor.

SB. Malone compares a passage from Lyly's Enphua (liSO).
a l&gt;ook which every educated Elizabethan read: "Thou sayest
banishment is better to the freebome. There be many meates
which ore sowre in the mouth and sweet in the maw ; but if thou
mingle them with sweet sawccs, they yeeld tK&gt;th a pleasant taste
and wholesome nourishment. I speake this to this end \ that
thougph thy exile geems grievous to thee, yet, guiding thysetfe with
the rules of philosophy, it shall be more tolerable." The same
thought is in the familiar words of At Yov Like It, U. 1. IS:
" Sweet are the uses of adversity."

60. prevails, avails, as in Ilsnry V, iiL 2. 16: " If wishes would
prevail with me. My purpose should not f^l with me."

6S. disptlie, reason, discuss ; as in Lotie't Labour'* Loit, v. 1.
69: "ThoudisputestlikeaninfanL"

71 fl. No such dialogue is found in Painter or Brooke, but
fjUer shows that it is fairly dose to that of Struijs Id the corre-
sponding scene. Fuller translates :

" Fr. L. My son keep to thy senses . . . Truly thy grief ex-
ceeds all bounds. Methinks I hear some one. Still ! I will go
first and see who it is, that thou mayst not be betrayed ; and so
it be not a trusty friend, he shall remain outside. Ha! 'tis the
nurse. Now I may open the door.

"{Enter Nurse.)

" Rojnto. My heart is comforted. What may she brings?
Wek-ome, nurse; how is it with my Juliette? What tidings
bringest thou me?

" Num. Alas '. Romeo, thy mistress lies for thy sake in ex-
treme grief; she sighs the whole day long, and cannot sleep an
hour of the night — so presses her her sorrow. My heart breaks
to hear her moan and sob in the bitterest of the aighL Thy
absebce, my lord, makes her often call for death."

86-6. O woeful sympathy! Piteous predicament t In all
the early ediUons these words are included as here in the Nurse's
speech. Most modern editors follow Farmer and Steevens in trans-
ferring thero to the Friar, on the ground that it is out of character
for the ignorant nurse to use such language. But Delius, Daniel.



166 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Them

and Ne[Uon, as well as the Cambridge editors, preserve the eariici'
reading-.

90. an O, an affliction, expressed by the use of that inteijeelion.

94. old, practised; as in our expression, " old reprobate."

98. conceal'd. The fact that Juliet is his lady is concealed from
the world. The word was pronounced much like caitctlTd in the
same line, producing a pun.

103. level, aim, range ; cf. Portia's " level at my affection,"
Merckant of Venice, i. S, 41,

106. anatomy, body, as in King John, ill 4. 40: "That M
anatomy. Which cannot hear."

109. In this speech Shakespeare is closely following Brooke,
For the antithesis between man and beaaC, cf. Macbeth, i. 7. 46 ff.

119. Again the dramatist seems to have made an unimportant
slip in transferring some of the details of the story to the stage.
Romeo has not been railing on his birth here, but in Brooke's
poem he does so rail.

128. form of wax. The disparagement implied in the Friar'a
use of this phrase raises the question whether the Nurse's reference
to Paris in i. 3. 76, as a man of wax, may have a similar turn. But
the Nurse probably does not so intend, for she is all admiration of
Paris's person.

127. digressing. See Glossary.

132. Steevena notes that English soldiers using m&amp;tchlocks had
to carry lighted matches neat the wooden flasks in which was their

134. "And thou torn to pieces with thine own weapons"
(Johnson).

161. blaze, publish, make known &lt; Old Norse hlOta, blow. Cf.
blazon, in ii. 6. 96, above, = proclaim.

1B9. This characteristic remark of the old Nurse affords a mucb-
desired comic relief.

SCENE 4

The counterplot now develops a new and impossible complica-
tion, a second marriage of Juliet following the first. The complete
entanglement lies in the fact that Romeo's killing of Tybalt makft.
hkewise impossible the alternative course, the announcement of the
first marriage.

4. born to die, a commonplace already uttered by the Nurse to
til. 3. 92, above. Capulet's grief is not profound.



Scene Five] NOTES 167

fl. woe . . . woo. Note the quibble.

11. meu/'d up, confined, shut up ; cf. Th» Tamtnff of the Shrta,
i. 1, 189: "Anil therefore has he closely mew'd her up." The
word comes from the Latin mutars, change, through the French.
Used first to indicate the change by moulting of a bird's feathers, it
developed the sense here because moulting hawks were caged.

18. desperate tender, bold offer. Steevens cites The Weakett
Qoethto tha WalUlGW): "Witness this desperate tender of mine

2S. keep no great ado, as we coUoquiaUy say, " make no great

32. against. See GlossHry.

34, Afore me, originally perhaps, as Dyce explains, Ood hifart
me, i, e,, in the presence of God. Some critics explain the words as
an address to the tori^h-bearer to carry the light before Capulet to
the chamber, but this is unlikely.

36. bg and by. Cf. note on il. 2. 151. above,

41-64. For reading of Q 1 see Appendix A, IV.



SCENE S

The decline of the lovers' fortunes is now accelerated. First
with retarded movement, in lines full of foreboding, Romeo leaves
Juliet for Mantua. Then the storm breaks. In quick successioD
come Lady Capulet's formal announcement of the plan for Juliet's
wedding to Paris, the daughter's flat refusal, old Capulet's frenzy
on hearing this news, his coarse taunts, and threats of death unless
his will be observed. Next, Juliet's pathetic appeal to her mother
meets with a cold response, and even the Nurse's counsel is delib-
erately wicked. Desperate, Juliet cuts loose from them oil, resolved
on going to the Friar and ready for suicide if he cannot help.

Capulet's Orchard. There is much diversity of opinion as to the
setting here, and some editors would divide the scene after 1. 59.
The chief difGculty with this arrangement is that Juhet stays on
the stage the whole time. It is probable that in Elizabethan play-
bouses all the action, except Ronieo's descent to the ground, took
place above the main floor on the nalfony at the back of the stage.
This balcony was supposed to represent Juliet's chamber.

1. Fuller sees here again the influence of the English play fol-
lowed by Strutjs. In the Dutch version Romeo declares that it is
four o'clock and he has to depart His wife expresses surprise to



168 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Thus

hear tliat it Is bo late, and later utters the fear that they shall neTe&gt;
more meet. Romeo cahns her fears and climbs down.

4. yon pomegranate. Note the realistic effect of the a^ective-
The pomegranate tree appears to be the favorite haunt of tL;
nightingale in manj lands.

8. lace, •' to diversify with streaks of color " (_N. E. Diet). Cf.
Macbeth, ii. 3. IIS: "His silver'd skin laced with his golden

9. Cf. SonneU, xxl. IS : " Those gold candles fix'd ui heaien's
air." For other dawn pictures in Shakespeare, see note on il 3.
1-6, aI&gt;ov&amp;

13. I know il, L . See note on iii. 1. 58, above.

13. exhales. According to popular scientific notions at the time
meteors were composed of vapors drawn up by the sun. Many
lines in Shakespeare illustrate this beUef. as Juliat Catar, tL 1. Ui



19. morning's eye. Cf. Milton's Lt/eidat: " under the opening
eyeUds of the mom. "

20. reflex, reflection. The moon shioing on the clouds is re-
•iacted therefrom. Brow is used for face, but some editors change
the word to bow, and understand it as referring to the e^^ent of
the new moon.

21. Nor . . . not. For the double negative see note on iii. 1. W,

31-2. Other passages in which Shakespeare refers to the lark
aieLoee't Labovr'i Lott,y. 2. 914 ; Mid»ranmer Hfight't Ih-Kua, i. I.
184, iii. I. 133, iv. 1. 98 ; Merckantof Venice, v. 1. loi ; Taming of
the Shreui, iv. 3. 177 ; Cymbdine, n. 3. 31 i Riehard II, iii. 3.183:
WiTiler'i Tale, iv. 3. 9 ; Ail 'i WeU, ii. 5. 7 ; TroUut and Crettida,

26. Juliet strives to detain her husband, but when she finds him
yielding to her persuasions and thereby imperilling his life, she im-
mediately changes her tone and thinks only of his safety. She has
shown the same unselfishness in ii. 3. 64, above.

28. unpleasing sharps, acute and shrill sounds (Schmidt).

29. division, a quadrisyllable. The meaning is thus given in
N. E. Diet. : " The execution of a rapid melodic passage, originally
conceived as the dividing of each of a succession of long notes uito
several short ones." Cf. Heywood, A Wmmm Killed vtithSindiua
(acted 1603),*v. 3. 13-15i



"Her lutel Oh, God! Upon this iostrumenl
Her fingers have rung quick division
Sweeter than that which now divides our hearts."

SI. An old saying due to the fact that the (English) lark has ugly
eyes, and the toad, beautiful If thej had only changed voices
too, Juliet says, there would be no need to heed the summons.

34, huni's-up. " Originally ' the hunt is up,' name of an old
song and its tune, sung or played to awaken huntsmen in the
morning; . . . hence ... an early morning song" (N. E. Diet.).
It ia used particularly of a '* song for a new-married wife, the day
after the marriage." as Cotgrave informs us. 'I'echnically, such a
song is called an aubade.

43. Some editors prefer the reading of Q 1 ! " my Lord, my
I.oTe, my Frend. " The text here is practically that of other Qq
and F. It must be remembered tYtaXfrUnd in Elizabethan English
bore a much ivarraer connotation than it bears at present. Dowden
points out that in tJie corresponding passage in Brooke ^iwiui and
friendship occur where we should speak of toner and i&lt;n&gt;e.

61-7. The presentiment of coming evil, which we have noted
in several scenes before, here assumes more definite shape. But
Romeo, who in the last scene was in the depths of despair, has
taken on new hope, and is sure that all will be well with them.
Henceforth his courage never falters.

S2~3. Possibly an echo of the familiar line from Vergil, AJneid,
f, 903: "forsan et htee olim meminisse juvabit."

69. Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Dry = thirsty. '* The belief
that grieving exhausts the blood and impairs the health, is more
than once alluded to by Shakespeare " (Clarke). Cf. MiiimmmeT
Night'i Dream, iii. 9, 9T : " sighs of love that costs the fresli blood

67. down, I. *., downstmts, with a quibble on up.

68. procures, brings ; cf ii. 3. 1*5, above, where the verb means
"cause to corae."

71. Cf. Juliet'swords, iii. 8.'l30,above! " Wash they his wound
with tears."

78. feeling, aSecting, heartfelt.

78. cannot choose but. To Elizabethans this phrase meant
scarcely more than " must necessarily." Cf. 2 Ileary IV, iiL 8.
220-1 J " Nay, she must be old ; she cannot choose hut beold."

82. be, a frequent use ; there is no need to adopt ars, the read-
ing of Ql. Abbott, §300.



170 ROMEO AND JULIET [AcrTHia

. 64. tike he- Fotthe nominative form, cf, Abbott, | 206.

89-92. Compare Lady Capulet's cry for immediate reveoge of
the death of Tybalt, ii). 1. Ut, above

91. shaU give. The relative is omitted, as frequently in Shak^
speare. Cf. Abbott. § 2U.

97-100. Dr. Johnson, the stem moralist, declares that "Ju-
liet's equivocations are rather too artful for a mind disturbed b;
the loss of a new lover." Clarke replies that they are " exactly
the sort of shifts and quibbles that a nature rendered timid bj
stinted intercourse with her kind, and by communion limited to
the innocent confidences made by one of her age in the confes-
sional, is apt to resort to, when first left to itself in difGculties of
situation and abrupt encounter with life's perplexities." Besides,
it has been pointed out "that this is atypical Elizabethan quibbling
passage, and that Shakespeare has brought this about in an artili-
cial way so that Juliet is forced to quibble. Such quibbles as she
uses are perfectly nugatory as to her character. She quibbles
chiefly for the amusement of the audience. "

Absolute frankness does not ^ide Juliet in all her conversations
with her mother, her father, the Nurse, or Count Paris. But there
are good reasons for her lack of confidence in each of them.

99. That, so that Abbott, § 9B3.

lOS. needy, needful, necessary.

107. they. Tidisifs. like news, is either singular or plural In
Shakespeare. Ct. Antong and Cleopatra, iv. 14. 113; "Thissword
but shown to Ciesar with this tidings ; " and the same play , iL 5.
97 : " Let ill tidings tell Themselves when they be felt."

110. sorted oul. contrived, brought about:.

lia. in happy time. This day of joy comes appropriately, jusl
at the right time. The thought is the same as in 1. lOfl.

119. Juliet's irony is adapted from Brooke, 11,1905-6:

" Madam. I marvel much that yon so lavas [t e. wasteful] are
OI me your child."

122. / swear. Some editors, probably wishing to save JuHel
from using an oath here, follow Q 1 in omitting this expression,
But just six hues al&gt;ove the girl has sworn " by Saint Peter's
church, and Peter too." She is greatly stirred with indignation,
and in ao mood to employ soft language or show timidity. See
Appendix D for other examples of alexandrines.

127. the air, the reading of Qq 4, 5, adopted by most editors,
though Malone prefers Ihe earth of Q 3, F,



Scene Five] NOTES 171

130. eondtdt. Brooke apparently has a particular fondness for

this figure. See Appendix B for iastances of its use.

Malone notes that " conduits in the form of human figures were
common in Shakespeare's time."

127-31. Note quibbles on lun, tiaaeU ion, lUw. rain, thovermff.

131-8. Another series of conceits not appreciated by modem

136. Who. Cf. note to i. 1. 119, above.

142. take me with you, let me catch your meaning. Cf. Fal-
ataff'a exquisite rejoinder to the Prince's description of htm,
/ Henry IV, ii. *. 506 : " I would your grace would take me with
you : whom means your grace ? "

Capulet's outrageous lan|^age to his daughter should be com-
pared with King Lear's to Cordelia, Lrar, i. 1. 110 S. Neither
father )s willing to believe that his child will not accede to any of
his desires. When an unreasonable request is refused, each par-
ent breaks into an ungovernable storm of wrath, which raises the
protest of a subordinate. Even closer parallels to the language of
Capulet will be fuund In that of the Lord Mayor to his daughter
Rose in Dekker's The Snoemalur'a Holiday (1599), iii. 3 ff.

145. wrought, succeeded in winning, effected.

166. hurdle, a sledge to drag criminals to execution. JV. E.Dicl.
cites Dickens, Tale of Tibo CUiei; " He'll be drawn on a hurdle
to be half hanged."

IBS. tallow-face. Romeo In I. A!) has remarked on the girl's
paleness, ascribing it to " dry sorrow." Old Capulet, now thor-
oughly angry, hints a less delicate cause.

166. lent. Q 1 hasMnt, which many editors adopt. Theuseof

letU in this sense is well established. In Brooke, L 1795, Lady

Capulet says of Tybalt, " God hath cUimed the life that was but

lent." Sothepre-ShakespearianA'in^L&lt;ir (published 1605), 43-1:

" My gracious Lord, I hartily do wish.

That God bad lent you an heyre indutatale."

This, it will be noticed, does not refer to one who has died, but, as
in the text, to a non-existent child. Moreover, a recent newspaper
item from London reports "a curious variation from the usual .
birth notice " in Surrey, reading " the loan of a son," whose name
follows. The item continues, "A similar idea is to be found In aa
epitaph in Kingsbridge church yard in Devon. It runs : ' My
parents dear, do not lament. I was not given, but only lent.'"
172- smaller, prate, prattle. Dowden cites Heywood, 3J^



172 EOMEO AND JULIET [Act Foo«

Pardons and the Friar: " What, standest thou there all the day



173. God ye god-den. See note on i. 2. 58, ahove. Of course

Capulet is ironical in this speech, and he probably bows as he

utters it, pretisely as Mercutio has mocked the Nutse In ii, 1. 116.

178. The line is scanned. No. 10, in Appendix D.

183. Bolfe compares Much Ado, i. 1. 56-T, " stuffed with aU

honourable virtues."

186. in her fortune's lender, when fortune is ofered to her.
;,&lt;&gt;3. Cf. Brooite, I. 19b3, " Advise thee well, and' say that tbon
art wam^ now." advise = reflect, consider.

198-9. Cf. the wretched king's appeal, Lear, 11. 4. 193ff. :
"O, heavens.
It you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if yourselves are old.
Make it your cause ; send down and take my part ! "

200. swee{ my mother. Compare note to iii. 8. 98, atwve.

208. With what infinite pathos the helpless girl now turns to th&lt;
Nurse after being repelled alike by her rsgi.ig father and bard-
hearted mother !

214 S. Shakespeare is again following Brooke or the old play.
In Imth Struijs and Brooke such a conversation occurs, but it is
later in the story.

222. green. Green eyes were then looked on with great lavor.
Dowden cites Two Noble Kinsmen, v. 1 : " Thy rare green eye."

229. Amen ! The girl is really putting a period to the curse
that the Nurse has just pronounced on her heart and soul. It is
a heartfelt expression of her abhorrence of the wickedness now
revealed.

234. Q 1 has a significant stage-direction here. As the Nurse
withdraws. Juliet " lookes atter " her. In her amazement at the
woman's perAdy, the young wife watches her until she is out of

ACT IV - SCENE 1

Act iv. Is devoted tn Juliet's struggles against the antagonistic
forces, her endeavor by means of a desperate expedient to escape
the de5truction that threatens her. This secures for the audience
a brief lightening of the ten.^ion in the hope that the catastrophe
may yet be averted. In Scene 1 Juliet throws P&amp;ris off his guard,



ScEME Owe] notes 173

then leanu from the Friar of bis daogeroas remedy, and Immedi-
stely agrees to try it
S- This Ihie has given editors much unnecesfary trouble. The

neamng is obviously, to use Dr. Johnson'ti parnphrose, "His haste
shall not be abated bj my slowness." Aoi.'ordiii^ to modem stand-
ards the words would mean the reverse ; but to tiaek ma; be taken
in the sense. " that I should slack," " in order to slack."

5. uneven, " indirect, not straightforward" (Dowden). Haml»t,
ii. 2. 298; "Be even and direct with me," shows the contrary term.

11. moTTiage, a trisyllable ; see Appendix D.

18-36. Rolfe thinks that " this part of the scene evidently came .
from the first draft of the play. " Not necessarily ; it is the sort of
" give and take " dialogue that is frequent throughout the Ellsa-
bethan drama, and Juliet's assumed lightness at first makes mote
effective her dedaration of despair on the moment of Pads'a

21. What must be shall be, Italian " che *era ura (tarii),"
quoted by Marlowe and trauslated. The sentiment Is common
with Shakespeare and his contemporaries.

39. abused, disfigured, defaced ; &lt; Lat abiUor, abtuta, &lt; ab,
away from, + Mtor, use.

38. evening mass. The term has called forth from several
editors' comment on Shakespeare's " error " as to Roman CathoUc
usages, but the dramatist is right. Bowdon's Religion of Shakt-
tptart (1899) shows " that masi was used of various church offices ;
that in the stricter sense of mass there was great latitude in ancient
times as to the hour; that Pius V. (1.^66-73) prohibited evening
masses ; that the new law was slow in coming into operation in
Germany, and perhaps in England ; finally, that in Verona the for-
bidden custom lingered to the nineteenth century " (Dowden).

11. shield, avert, forbid, as hi .^U'« WeU, i. 3. 174: "God shield
you mean it not"

devotion, a quadrisyllable. See Appendix D, and cf. fii. 5. S9,
dhition.

44-G. It is worthy of note that in this outburst of Jubet's deep
anguish every word is a simple raonosyllable.

U. this knife. It seems to have been a custom for ladles of
that day to wear knives at their girdles with which to cut meat st

57. label. To deeds In Elizabethan tiroes labels, not stamps,
were affixed. These labels were the strips of ribbon or paichmentto
which seals were attached.



174 HOMEO AND JULIET [Act Fora

63. extremes, extreine hardships or sufferings.

S2 S, This knife shall detenaiae the issue between lue and my
sufferings. Id Brooke Juliet teUs her mother that rather thaa
marry Paris she will pierce her breast with "bloody knife."

H. comrmssion, authority.

78. yojtder lower. Agaiu a restoration by Pope from Ql.
Ulrici adopts and defends the reading of Qq. Ff. " any tower," as
more natural and more vigoroua. The reading of the text is drv
maticolly much more effeetive. Cf. note to iii. &amp;. 4. above.

79. thievish ways, t. «. roads or paths frequented by thieres.
89-120- Shakespeare again closely fallows Brooke. See Appen-
dix B, I.

106. two and forty hours. Shakespeare here departs from his
source, probably, as Dowdcn suggests, in order to give " an air of
precision and verisimilitude to the Friar's arrangement.'' Since no
amount of arithmetk will make these figures accord exactly with
the situation in the final act, several emendatitms hare beea pro-
posed here. Editors someUmea foiget that these plays weie
written for the stage, and that audiences in Shakespeare's day weie
not accustomed to figure out time analyses in their notebooks.

109. as the manner o} our countn/ is. The explanatory dausa
is put in for the benefit of the English audience, Shakespears
found this Italian custom porticulary alluded to in Brooke. It 'a
also referred to in Coryat's CrvditUi (1776), ii. 87.

114. drift, scheme, design ; hterslly, driving, &lt; M. E. drift,
verbal abstract &lt; A. S. drlfiin. drive, Cf. ii. 3. A5, above.

119. no inconstant toy. No light whim, caprice. C£ Btodu^
a 9189-90 1

"God grant he so confirm in thee thy present will,
That no ioconstaat toy thee let thy promise to fulfil."

122. get you gone. Reflexive use of the verb. Abbott, | 296.

SCENE 3

In this scene, \riiile the hostile farces ar« apparently triumphant,
we find Juhet, in obedience to the counsel of the Friar, again de-
ceiving them with pretended submission.

2. twenty cunning cooks. Capulet' has evidently forgotten bi&gt;
intention not to " revel much" on account of Tj'bait's death.



Scene Three] NOTES 175

8. on iTI cooA, etc., a proverbial expression occurring also Id
Puttenham's Art o/EnfflishPoeaie{\^^): "A bad cook that can-
not his own fingera liclc."

14. peevish self-wiWd harlolry. Cf. 1 Henrj/ IV, jiL 1. 198,
■where Glendower, who really loves his daughter, says that she is
" a, peevish Eelf-will'd harlotry, one that no persuasion can do good

36. becomed, becoming. For this frequent Elizabethan idiom,

cf. Abbof-t, §§ 29*, 3J*.
81. Brooke, IL e349-S0 :

"In all our commonweal scarce one is to be found
But is for some good tm^ imto this holy father bound."

8S. closet, chamber, private room.

89. near nighl, a deft touch by the dramatist looking forward
to the next scene, and giving point to Lady Capulet's housewifely
concern. It troubles some critics that it should be just after day-
break when Juliet departs for the Friar's cell, but near night when
she returns. An Elizabethan audience would not have demanded
a foolishly close attention to consistency in such details.



SCENE 3

Here the desperate remedy proposed by the Friar is finally put
to the tesL After playing her part with her mother and the Nurse.
as in Scene 1 with Paris. a.nd in Scene S with her father. Juliet by
the supreme effort of her life dares even tne lorab for the sake of
her husband. The &amp;ct that her actual awakening in Act v. is
dramatically foreshadowed intensifies the horror.

L ojr. Evidently in answer to a question of the Nurse as to the
garments she wished to put on for her wedding day. How closely
Shakespeare follows Brooke throughout this scene will appear by
comparison with the summary of the poem. Appendix B, 1.

2. leave me to myself. Juliet is following out the Friar's in-
structions, iv. 1. 91, above. The Nurse is in the habit of sleep-
ing in Juliet's chamber.

D. cross, perverse; not "ill-tempered. "

IS. this so sudden business. The irony in the phrase should
not be overlooked.

19. must act alone. Here is the pathos of the whole situation.



176 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fmn

The yctung girl who so desires counsel and sympathy is cut off from
help in every direction.

80. Com«, vial. Note the metrical pause after these words.

33. this shall forbid it. See note on iv. l. j4, above.

St-BS. The reading of these lines in Q I will be found in Ap-
pendix A, IV.

39. Cf. line 970 of the final scene, •' We still have known thee
for a, holy man. "

SB. As, i. ». " as, for example." Cf. HanUtt. \. t SS : " As, ia
their birth."

receptacle. Cf. TUu» Androaicut, i. 1. 92 : " O sacred r^ptadc
of my joys. "

43' green, i. «. fresh ; cf. Sonnelt. IxiiL 13-4 1

" His beauty shall in these black lines be seen.
And they shall live, and he in them still green."

4T- mandrakes. Onaccountof theresemblanceofthemandrste,
or mandragors, root and the human figure, and perhaps aho on ac-
count of the first syllable of its name, it was popularly supposed to
be engendered by dead criminals. When the root was torn from
the ground, it is said to utter such shrieks that those hearing it went
mad or died. Steevens collected a number of literary allusions to
this belief, to which Shakespeare again refers in I Henry VI, iiL i.
310: -'Would curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan."

67. slay^Btop, don't follow Romeo.

H- within the curtains. This stage direction is taken from Q 1.
The cuTtairu fell from the raised stage, or balcony, and were used,
when necessary, to shut off that portion underneath. Juliet MU
upon her bed. the curtains close in &amp;ont of her, and the action then
goes forward in the Uail in front



SCENE ♦
2. pattry here means place where pastry is prepared, pootiyt

4- eurfew. Originally applied only to the evening bell, the term
came to include other ringings.

'tis three o'clock. Still another marking of the time, but note
that several hours seem to pass within a few minutes, for at the
close it is day and time to waken Juliet. Q I reads foare a docke.



ScBKE Five] NOTES 177

2f. E. Vial, quotes the Liverpool Municipal Records of 1613 and
1704 to show that the curfew was there rung at four o'clock.

C. baked meats, pies, pastry; particularly applied to meat pies.

Angelica, probably the name of Lady Capulet, as the remark
would be addressed to her rather than to the Nurse.

6. Spare not for cost. This is the same Capulet who in the last
scene would fain hire twenty cunning cooks, and who in i. 5 refuses
to harm even his bitter enemies, so long as they are his guests.
Shakespeare got the hint from Brooke, who tells us, I. 158, that
Capel " spar'th for no cost " in his banquet.

6-8. Go, you cot-quean, etc. Some editors assign this speech to
Lady Capulet, thinking it too bold for the Nurse to utter. But the
latter is allowed exceptional liberties with her tongue, and usually
takes advantage of them. iVlark her plain lan^age to Capulet, iii.

11. mouse-hunt See Glossary.

26. the bridegroom he is come. For the redundant pronpuD,

cf. Abbott, § 34a

SCENE 5

This scene shows the apparent success of the Friar's plan and
the defeat of the counterplot, leaving the audience in hopes that
the story may yet end happily. Hence the tone of farce in the
grief-making, and the comic interlude at the close of the scene are
dramatically effective. '

1. The line is scanned. No. II, in Appendix D.

13. down, i.e. in bed.

20 fl. The directness and evident restraint of this speech indicate
Capulet's genuine affection for his child. If we are to judge from
his speeches hare, his grief is more sincere than that of any one
else present.

82. ioiH not let me speak. Malone quotes from Brooke the state-
ment that Capulet was so grief-stricken that he had no power to
weep " ne yet to speak," and adds that Shakespeare was here fol-
lowing the poem closely, " without recollecting that he had made
Capulet in this scene clamorous in his grief." The latter assertion
may be doubted. As Rolle suggests, it would be perfectly natural
for the old man to make this speech and afterwards become " clam-
orous in his grief." Consistency is not one of Capulet 's virtue!!.

40. living, property, possessions ; as in Wml4T'i Tah, iv. 3. ]04t
"where my land and living lies."



178 EOMEO AND JULIET [Act Fotr»

li. / thought long to see, it seemed to me a long time until I
could see. Brooke, I. 9374, tells us thab Paris's " longing heart
thinks long for their appointed hour." The phrase is common, oc-
curring again in at least two anonymous plays whi(?h Shakespeare
knew. In The Troublmome Reign of King John, Part II, we have ;

I " The nobles, commons, clergie. all estates . . .

Tbinke longe to see their new elected king."

Again in the older King Leir, I. *99, Ragan says of her betrothed.
" Well, I thinke long untill I see my Morgan."

48. cateh'd. An unusual form found again in OoTtoUmui, I 3. 6H.

49 fl. Perhaps, as R. G. White suggests, Shakespeare is her«
ridiculing the style of the 1581 .translation of Seneca's IVojsdw*
Dowden compares the Pyraraus and Thisbe play in A M'dmmmsr
Nighl'a Dream. Much Elizabethan poetry is of this same florid
style.

SB. detestable. For accent see Appendix D, and cf. v. 3. 4S,
below.

60. VncomfoTtable, afibrding no comfort, joyless,

66. confusion's, ruin's, destruction's ; quibbling with amfuMovi,
below, which has the modern sense. Cf. con/otmd) In il 6. 13,

The Friar proves a good actor here. Nothing in his behavior in-
dicates his knowledge that Juliet is not really dead.

70. Am, its, as in ii. 6. IS, above.

72. advanced, exalted, as in v. 3. 96, below, with a play on the
usual sense of the word.

76. she is well, a phrase often used as a euphemism for death.
Cf. V. I. 17, below.

79- rosemary. See note on ii. 4. 226, above. Several editOTS
cite Dekker, Wonderfal Year (Works, ed. Grosart, i. l£9)i "The
rosemary that was washt in ^weete water to set out the Biidall is
now wet in teares to furnish her buriall."

60. as the custom is. See note on iv. 1. 109, above.

84. The corresponding passage in Brooke is quoted. Appen-
dix B.

99. case. The Nurse of course uses the word in the common
sense of " state of affairs," but the musician quibbles, applying it
to the cover for hia instrument.

101. Enter Peter. From two of the Quartos we learnthat Will
Kemp, the famous comedian, who belonged to ShaJcespeare's com-



Scene Ftve] NOTES 179

panyofactora, played the part of Peter, for they read here, "Enter
Will Kemp." This portion of the scene was probably wiittea
paiticulariy for him. Some time has to elapse between Juliet's
supposed death and the ajinounceinent of the faet to Romeo in
the Dext acene. In the interim Kemp may well entertain the
audience atter the nlanner of the gravedii^er in Hamlet, t. 1,
and the drunken pocter in Maebeih, iL 3. Were Juliet really
dead, this unseemly mirth in bei home might shock our sense of
decency.

103. " Heart's ease," the name of a popular tune mentioned in
Rychardes's Maagomtt {circa 1560). The. music U to be found in
Naylor's SkakeapeareandMiaif., p. 193.

1.07. Steevens points out that the tmrden of the first stanza of
" A Pleasant New Ballad of Two Lovers," which was reprinted in
the Shdketpeare Society Paptrt, L IS, is " Hey ho ! my heart is AiIl
Of woe. -

107-8. jneny dump. Peter gets his terms mixed, as damp
means a dolefiil strain.

IIB. " To give the gleefc "was to scoff, to mock. Perhaps there
was in the term mitutr»l some contemptuous connotation not now

117-8. servaig-cTeafure, i. ». retort by calling fou a serviug-
deature, which seems to have been another insulting terra.

ISO- cany no crotchets, put up with none of your whims. A
quibble is here, erotchit* meaning ** musical characters," as well as
" caprices."

12L re you . . . fa you. Ulrici suggests more quibbles. Rag
meant to bejoul, and fay to eUanst. Peter might do 'both with a
" dry-beating."

125. have at you. " Peter takes put &lt;na not as meant, i. «. ex-
tinguish, but as the apposite otptUnp (your dagger), and so draw,
unsheathe " (Dowden).

128. When griping grief, etc. The entire poem quoted here
may be found in Percy's Rdiqiiat, Series I, Book ^, under the title,
"A Song to the Lute in Musicke." It was written byRichard
Edwards, and published itj the Panub/te oflktytUy Dtviie* (i5IG),
a lamous Blizabetban anthology.

132. Simon Catling. The surname, like those of B^heek and
Soundpott, below, indicates the profession. Catling is '*a small
lute-string made of catgut " ; and rebeck, *' an instrument of three
strings" (Steevens). C£ Milton's L' Allegro: "And the jocund
rebecks sound."



180 ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fiv»

185- Prettg t Peter Is patroniiing the musicians for thor an-
awers to hU riddle. Pope restored the word from Q I, id ploc^ of
Pratet, as in Q 3, and Prateat in Q 3, F. A similar replacemen)'
oiicurred in I. 13S, below. Few editors reject Pope's reading.

147. pestUeiU, pestering, plaguy.



ACT V— SCENE 1

Neither Paris nor the Capulets, whom Juliet has so outwitted,
prove to be the lovers' most formidable foes, but it Is now seen
that they are bghting against their ona evil fate, or the stars, as
already hinted several times in the play. Here a mistaken report
of Juliet's death hurries Romeo on to the catastrophe^

1. The meaning is. If I may trust that creation of sleep, i. «. my
dream, "which bears the flattering semblance of truth." Q 1 reads
" eye "of sleep, which many editors prefer. "Ruth," "sooth,"
" death," and other unnecessary substitutes for InUh have been



. bosom's lord, heart Steevens notes that in Chester's Love'i
Martyr (1601), the phrase occurs and Is marginally explained as

4. an unaccusfom'd spirit. It is unusual for Rnmeo to be so
cheerful that he can interpret an evil dream as presaging good.
His cheerfulness began, we remerober, the morning of his de-
parture from Juliet, when he endeavored to calm her presen-
timents.

Munro, following Skeat, compares with this passage a famoua
one in Chaucer's Troilui and Craegds, v. 116* ff. There Trollus,
like Romeo, separated from his love, and about to receive eiil
Dews of her, says :

" But harddy, it is not al tor nought
That in mya herte I now reioyse thus.
It is ayein som good I have a thought.
Noot I not how, but sin that I was wrought
Ne felte I swich a confort, dar I sCye;
She oomth to-night, my lyf, that dorste I leyel"

In each case the story gains dramatically by the strong contrast
between what the hero expects to hear and what he really hears
about his loved one.



Scene Oke] NOTES 181

8. Steevens compares Marlowe's JItro and Laandtr (published
1598) : " He kissed her and breathed life into her iips." The figure
may easily have occurred to the two writers independently, but
Shakespeare may have known the poem in manuscript, as Marlowe
died in 1593. The poem is quoted in At Yoa Like It, liL 5. B9, and
referred to, ibid., iv. I. lOU-e.

10. Ah me! This may be, as Rotfe implies, only another in-
stance of the lover's sigh. Cf. i. 1. 167 ; iL t. 10 ; ii. 3. 35, and
ia 2. 36, above.

11. booted, to indicate that he had come on horseback.

17. is well. Cf. note on iv. 5. T6, above.

18. Capets', another form of Capulets' which Shakespeare found
Also in Brooke.

31. presently. See Glossary ; cf. pretanl. 1. 51, below.

32. pardon me, an allusion to the ani-ient custom of punishing
the bringer of evil tidings, occasionally by death, while the mes-
senger of good was rewarded. Balthasar seems almost to deserve
severe punishment for the promptness and bluntness with which he
delivers the false news.

these ill news. See note on ii. 5. H,

34. Note the simplicity of the words, yet, as Clarke says :
" There is a terribly quiet depth of concentrated anguish and will
In this brief desp^Hng ejaculation of Romeo's that is more exprcs-.
sive than a hundred raving lines of lament would be." According
to Fuller, in Struijs Romeo does rave at some length ; " Is ray mis-
tress dead? Is, it true? How comes it then that Phoebus still
shines on? Or can he still without flickering cast his gaze upon
the earth?" And this vein continues for several lines more.

27. patience, a trisyllable.

86. in, into; cf. Abbott. § 150.

39. weeds, clothing, garments; "widows' weeds" illustrates
the term.

overwhelming, overhanging.

4fi fl. This description was suggested by Brooke, though the
concrete details are Shakespeare's. See Appendix B.

60. Gear = stuff. The language is close to Brooke's.

$1. Cf. Lyly,£apftiie*(H'orjt», ed. Bond, p. BIB): "One droppe
of poyson diaperselh it selfe into everye vaine."

67. ang he, any man ; a frequent Elizabethan usage. Cf. Ab-
bott, 5 82*.

utters, puts into circulation, trades in. Tht Winttr't Tait, iv. 4.
330, says that rooney " doth utter " war&amp;



J82 KOMEO AND JULIET [Act Fivi

68. bare, poor, lean ; FalstaTs men in 1 Hatty IV, it. 2. T5,
are said to be " poor and bare."

77 fl. SteevcDS thought that perhaps Shakespeare in this speech
" had not quite forgotten " Chauc^er's PaTdaaer'a TaU, in which an
apothecary speaks similarly of the '■ violent " poison which he is
selling. This suggestion is confirmed by Romeo's reply, which
contains the very moral enforced and reiterated by Cbaucei
throughout the tale.

SCENE 8

looks backward to Scene 1, explaining why the true account of
Juliet did not reach Romeo, and forward- to Scene 3. suggesting
that the Friar may yet be in time to avert the catastrophe.

6. bare-foot brother. Dowden notes that this informatioa is
gleaned troin Brooke, but that the poem places the pestilence at
Mantua. See Appendix B, 1.

16. infection, a quadrisyllable; see Appendix D.

18. nice. For the meaning of this word see Glossary.
charge, weight, importance.

19. dear, i. e. of great importance.

ai. crow, crow-bar. Th«Com^ of Errort,iAl l.iO: "Qo\iot-



SCENE 3

Seemingly Fortune, or, as Romeo believes, thnr evil star, dete^
mines the l^te of the lovers. Had Juliet's sleeping potion lost iti
effect a half-hour earlier, had the Friar arrived at the tomb a few
moments sooner, the lives of both lovers would have been saved.
Even PariR, by chance meeting Romeo at the grave, is involved in
their. common fate. But only a sacrifice like this could mitigate
the long-standiug hatred between the families. Such is the dra-
matic explanation of the reconcile liient.

1. In Brooke the name of Paris does not occur after the wed-
ding morning. His presence at the tomb, and death there in de-
fence of the family honor appear to l&gt;e inventions of Shakespeare,
who has notably exalted the I'liaracter of Juliet's wooer.

3. lay thee all along, lie at full length. Note the reflexive use.

12. Cf Hamlet, v. 1. 86fi ff., where the Queen strews flowen
over Ophelia's grave and employs similar language.

12-7. For the form of these linea in Q 1. see Appendix A, IV.
Metrically they make a sestette. See note on L 3. 4&amp;-n5I, above.



Scene Thbee] NOTES 189

14. sweet water, water which has been pcriHimed.

41. take thou that. Romen throws him a purse.

44. doubt, distrust, have suspicioTis about.

4G. detestable. For act-eiit see Appendix D.

69. youth. Romeo consistently addresses Paris as too young a
man to fight. Just as he hinkelf is addressed by Tybalt iniii. 1. As
in that scene he shows here an aversion to personal combat and a
desire for peace, but Fate is against him eacb time.

84. lantern heresignifiesa tower erected on top of a building and
furnished with windows to admit light Juliet's grave is like such

86. presence, presence chamber, or room in which a person of
rank receives visitors.

S7. by a dead man. " Romeo t&gt;eing now determined to put an
«nd to his life, considers himself as already dead " (Malone).

90. lightiung before death. Steevens shows by several quota-
tions that this was a proverbial expression for an euiltation of the
spirits just before expiring. The lightning just below is a pun for
a lightening of spirits.

B4-6. With this passage Steevens compares Daniel's Coinplaurf
of Sj&gt;»aaiond (\&amp;»2), 11. 173^:

" And nought-respecting death (the last of paines)
Plac'd his pale colours (th' ensigne of his might)
Upon his new-got spoyle before bis right."

■ 96. advanced, r^sed, exalted ; cf iv. 5. 12, above.

■' 97. In this address to Tybalt Shakespeare is once more closely

faOowiag Brooke.

103- Fuller compares a passage in Stniijs immediately following^
Roniea'E receipt of the news of Juliet's death. There Romeo ex-
cUinsi " O death, O cruel death ! thee will I curse to all eternity
. . . O archer, void of reason, or else uncertain of thy aim ! thou
hastcnvied the earth the fostering of her, and thou grudgest me
the joyful embraces of such a wife,"
■ lOS-6. Here again, as Malone points out, is a close resem-
blanee to Daniel's Complaint of Rotantami, U. S4I-5. which nin:
"Ah, how me thinkes I see Death dallying seekes.

To entertaine it selfe in Loves sweet place

And ugly Death sits faire within her Face."
110. set ufi my everlasting rest, a metaphor from card-playing
which appean frequently in EUtabethan literature. For a plaje



18* ROMEO AND JULIET [Act Fh^

to set up his rest meant literally to lay his heaviest wager, to ven-
ture all. Romeo also has in mind the liberal meaningof the phrase,
aa has the King in Lear, \. 1. 125. Cf. too iv. 5. 6, above.

111. inauspicious stars. To the last Romeo ascribes his mi
fortunes to the influence of the planets.

116. •' An everlasting bargain to Death, who buys up wholesale."

116. conduct. See Glossary, and ef. iii. I. 129, above.

117. desperate pilot. Romeo has used the same metaphor be-
fore, i. 4. 112, above. But there he seems to refer to Fate, while
here the pilot ia himself.

121. speed, a guarding Power who promotes success &lt; A. S.

131. go with me. Even the eminently sensible Friar has enough
human nature in his make-up to fear going alone at night to Oi

14S. unkind. For accentimtion see Appendix D.

14S. comfortable, comforting, inclined to comfort or coDSolev
cf. unnom/ortabte, iv. 5. 60.

162. timeless, untimely.

170. rust. Many editors prefer the re&gt;t of Q 1. Reference to a
Eheath was first made in Q 2, where the reading is that of the pres-

dies. On the stage to-day the play frequently ends here. The
hero and the heroine arc both dead, and what follows is thought to
be in the nature of an anti-climax. But, as Dr. Fuller has sug-
gesled to me, this ending would not satisfy a story-loving Eliza-
bethan audience. They would wish to know what became of the
minor characters, and perhaps to have the moral of the story set
down at length. Besides, as some one else su^ests, it is Shake-
speare's habit to use an anti-climax in order to bring the audience
back to life.

173. attach, arrest.

176. these two days. The sleeping poUon was to have its effect
for "two and forty hours." Cf. iv. 1. 105.

179-80. Note the quibbling even at this juncture.

181. circumstance. See note on ii. 5, 3Q, ^hove.

203. his house^the dagger's sheath. Cf. noteon ii. 6. 13, above.

204. on the back, wliere the dagger was customarily worn, as
Steevcns proves by several citations.

207. my old age. Rolfc notes this as a slip. Probably the
phrase is due to carelessness on Shakespeare's part, though in view
of all her afflictions Lady C^ulet may well have felt old.



SctsB Thbee notes 185

210. My wift is dead. The tender sjinpathy of Lady Mon-
tague for her son effectively rontrasts with Lady Capulet's hard-
ne») toward her daughter. Cf. i. 1. 133-i.

ill. After this line in Q I we have i " And young Benvolio U
deceased too."

214 numnersis. For the usage of a singular verb with certain
nouns plural in form but singular in meaning, cf. Abbott, § 333.
JVsiM to-day is eimilarly us^.

216. outrage, outcry, passionate outburst

222. parties of suspicion, persons under suspicimi, suspected
ones. The plural of parly in the sense of " people" is heard
to-day, but outside nf the courts is (considered vuJgar.

223 S, " Shakespenre was led into this uninteresting narrative
by following Romeut mid J-alUl too closely" (Malone). But Pro-
fessor Chambers suggests that it is necessary to prepare Montague
and Cap u let for reconciliation.

220. I will be brief. In Brooke the Friar's speech Is anj^hiag
but brief.

217. as. Cf. Abbott, S H*. for the redundant use.

236. clos^y. secretly ; our phrase, " keep it dose," is founded
on the same sense.

373. in ^s^ post haste,

380. made, was doing, as frequently in Shakespeare.

284. byandby. Seenote to iL 3. 151, atxive.

29S. brace of kinsmen, i. «. Mercutio and Paris.

30&amp;-10. Note the sestette again.

306. According to Brooke, the Nurse and the Apothecary were
punished, Roraeo's servant was pardoned, and Friar Laurence
retired to a hermitage.



,,Goo^le



,,Goo^le



APPENDIX A

READINGS OF THE FIRST QUARTO

Aa already stated in the Introduction, the accepted text of Bomto
and JuUet is based not on the First Quarto (published by Danter
in 159T). but chiefly on the Second Quarto (published by Creede
in I59it), which bears on its title-page the Btatemcnt that the play-
has l&gt;een " newly corrected, augmented, and amended," The rela-
tion between the two quartos is clearly set forth by Mr. P. A.
Daniel in the introduction to his edition of the Parallel Texts :

*' A hasty and separate perusal of Q 1 may leave the reader with
the impression that it represents an earlier play than that given in
the subsequent editions ; read line by line with Q 'i iti true charac-
ter soon becomes apparent It is an edition made up partly from
copies of portions of the original play, partly from recollection and
front notes taken during the performance. Q S gives us for the
first time a substantially true representation of the original play.
Still. Q I is of great value, as it affords the means of correcting
many errors which crept into the ' copy ' from which Q 2 was
printed, and also, in its more perfect portions, affords conclusive
evidence tliat that * copy ' underwent revision, received some slight
augmentations, and. In some few places, must have been entirely
rewritten. "

To portray this situation more graphically, information is given
below as to (1) acts and scenes where Q I practically coincides with
the present text; (2) passages in the ac'Cepted text omitted from
Q 1 ! (3) some cases of evident garbling in Q 1 ; (4) some ewes in
which revision is evident l&gt;etween the writing of Q I and that
of Q3.

I. Passages in which Q 1 substamtiallv aorees with Q 3
i. 1. 163-222; \. 2 ; i. 3. 1-*8: j. 4. 1-16 and 3^114 ; i 5.



188 APPENDIX A

Hi, 1. 1-33 ; ill. a 1-117 and \S6-1i ; iii. 4 ; iii. S, 1-36, 13ft-
205 and ai4-43.
iv. 1. 1-Sl and 61-98; iv. 8 f tv. 4 ; iv. 5. 107-^.

II. Passases ouhted fbou Q 1

(This list is not intended to be complete. Minor verbal differ-
ences are necessarily not taken into account. For practical pur-
poses passages of less than five lines have been excluded.)

L I. 6T-87, 115-22, 136-16, 151-61, 223-4* i i. 3. 49-57, 69-73.
79-95 ; L 4. 17-?8 ; i. 5. 1-17, 24-fl.

ii. Chorus ; ii. 2. 121-35, 150-6 j ii, 3. 9-14 ; ii. 4. 405-31 ; ii. 6.
5-17, 20-1, 28-37 ; iL 6 (Rewritten. Cf. IV, below).

iii. 1. 52-8, 95-113 (Rewritten), 160-3; iii. 2. 5-33. 42-51. 57-60
(Rewritten). 74^92,93-9. 102-6. 114-22. 132-9 ; iiL 3. 118-34, IW-
51 ; iii. 5, 37-41, 60-i. 72-7, 83-8. 97-103, 206-13.

iv. 1. 53-60. 99-103, 106-14, 116-26 i iv. 2. 40-5; iv. 3. 8-13.
15-20, 24-56 (Rewritten) ; iv. 5. 26-32, 43-61 (RewiittenJ. 66-79,
82-97. 102-6.

V. 2. 24-9 J V. 3. 6-11, 13-7 (Rewritten). 'i'9-86, 92-102, 104-8,
111-6, 177-83, 21T-21, 224^1, 236-42, 245-9 (Rewritten), 252-6.

IIL Ihstances op Gaubleo Lines iv Q I

Numerous lines in Q 1 show text corruption, due either to niis-
printinf; or to misunderstanding the ori{;inal version. A few of
the more striking cases will iUustrate how the corruption arose.

In Q 1 the Prologue reads :

"Two houshold Frends alike in dignitie,
(In taire Verona, where we lay our Scene)
From civil! hrojles broke into enmitie,
Whose civill warre makes civill bandes uncleane.
From forth the fatall ioynes of these two foes,
A paire of starre-crost Louers tooke their life;
Whose misadventures, piteous overthrowes.
(Through the continuing of their Fathers strife.
And death- mark t passage of their Parents rage)
Is now the two howres traffique of our Stage.
The which if you with patient ears attend.
What here we want wee'l sLudic to amend."



APPENDIX A 189

Though these lines are the same in effect aa the lines in other
r-"%rtos. on comparison one will find only twelve lines in the Q I
version as agmnst fourteen in Q 9. Q I omits altogether 1. 11,
confuses the wording of li. 9 and. 10, combining the two, and tnaket
minor changes in other lines.

i. 6, lOT reads : " Saints do not move, though grant for prayers'

In place of this. Q 1 has ; " Saints doe not moove though ; grant
nor praier forsake."

:i, 2. 188 : " Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest ! "
Q 1 runs : " I would that I were sleep and peace of sweet to

iii. 1. lS-4 : " Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood
as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as sood
moody to be moved."

Q I ! " Go too, thou art as hot a lacke being moovde, and as
soone moovde to be inoodie, and as soone moodie to be moovd."
iii. 5. 44-5 : " I must hear from thee every day in the hour.

For in a minute there are many days."
Q 1 : "I must heare from thee everie ciay in the hower :
For in an hower there are manie minutes,
Minutes are dayes, so will I number them."
iii. .5. 226-7 : " Your first is dead : or t were as good he were.

As living here and you no use of him."
Q 1 : "As for your huaband he is dead :

Or twere as good he were, for you have no use of him."
iv. 5. 38-40 : " Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir ;
My daughter he hath wedded i 1 wili die.
And leave him all,"
Q 1 : " E&gt;eath is my Sonne in Law, to him I give all that I

T. 3. 133-4 : " And fearfully did menace me with death.

If 1 did stay to look on his intents."
Q 1 ; " On paine of death he chargde me to be gone.
And not for to disturbe him in his enterpriie."
T. 3. 140-1 ! " Alack, alack, what blood is this which staliu

The stony entrance of this sepulchre?"
Q 1 I " What bloud is this that Staines the entrance
Of this marble stony monument?"



,,Goo^le



APPENDIX A



IV. PiasAOEa m Q 1 revised is the Compositiom of Q 2

Coraparison of certain passages in Q I with corresponding lines
in Q 3 point clearly to the author's revision, of the play after Q 1
was written. These passages from Q I follow.

Corresponding to ii. 6 of our text, Q 1 reads:

Enter Borneo. Fner.

B&lt;mt: Now Father Lavrenm, in thy holy grant
Consists the good of me and luUet.

Fr : Without more words I will doo all I may.
To make you happie if in me it lye.

Bom: This morning here she pointed we should meet.
And consumate those never parting bands,
Witnea of our harts love by ioyniag hands.
And come she will.

Fr; 1 gesse she will indeed.
Youths love is quk-ke, swifter than swiftest speed.

Enter luliet tomttehat Jast, and embraeeth Bonua,

See where she comes-

So light of foote nere hurts the troden flower :

Of love and ioy, sec see the soveraigoe power.

Ifd: Romeo.

liam: My /ufief welcoiuA As doo waking eyea
(Cloasd in Nights myst?} attend the frolicke Day,
So KontKo hath expected Juliet,
And thou art come.

lul: I am {if I be Day)
Come to my Sunne i shine foorth, and nuke me faire.

Kam: All beauteous faimes dwetleth in thine eyes.

Jid: Romeo from thine all brightnes doth arise.

Fr: Come wantons, come, the stealing houres do passe
Defer imbracements till some fitter time.
Part for a while, you shall not be alone.
Till holy Church haue ioynd ye both in one.

Rom: Lead holy Father, all delay seemes long.

M; Make hast, make hast, this Ungring doth us wrong,

Fr: O. soft and faire makca sweetest woAe they say.
Hast is a common hindrer in erosse way. Exmnt omtut.



APPENDIX A 191

CoTTesponding to iij. I. 9S-113, Ql has:

Rom: What art thou hurt man, the wound is not dtq&gt;e.

3ler: Noe not so deepe us a WeU. not so wide as a bame doore,-
but it wili serve I warrant. What meant you to come betweeae
us ? 1 was hurt under four arme.

Eom : I did all for the hest.

JUtr: Apoxe of your houses. 1 am fairely drest. Sirra gae
fetch me a Surgeon.

Boj/ : I goe my Lord.

Mer: I am pepperd for this world, I am sped yfaith, he hath
made wormes nieate of me, &amp; ye aske for me to morrow you
shall finde me a grave-man. A poxe of your houses, I shall be
hire!)' mounted upon ibure mens shoulders : For your house of
the MounUifnei and the Capohta: and then some peasantly rogue,
some Sexton, some base slave shall write my Epitapth, that Tybalt
came and broke the Princes Lawes, and Merratlo was elaine for
the first and second cause. Wher 's the Surgeon?

Boy; Hee 's come air.

Mer: Now heele keepe a mumbling in axy guts on the other
side, come Benvolio, lend me thy hand : a poxe of your houses.
Exeunt,

Corresponding to iii. 2. 57-60, Q, t readf i

Ah Romeo, Romen, what disaster hap

Hath severd thee from thy true Juliet ?

Ah why should Heaven so much conspire with Woe,

Or Fate envie our happie Marria^,

So Boone to sunder us by timelesse Death?

Corresponding to iv. 3. 24-fiS are these lines i

What if this Potion should not worke at all.

Must I of force be married to the Countie?

This shall forbid it. Knife, lye thou there.

What if the Frier should give me this drinke

To poyson mee, forfeare I should disclose

Our former marriage? Ah, I wrong him muclw

He is a holy and religious Man:

I will not etitertaine so bad a thought.

What if I should he stifled in the Toomb?

Awake an houre before the appointed time:

Ah then I feare I shall be lunaticke,

And playing with my dead forgathers bones.



192 APPENDIX A

Dash out my franticke brainea. Me tiuokes I sea
My Cosin Tybalt weltring in his bloud.
Seeking for Romeo: stay Tybalt atay,
Romeo 1 come, this doe I drinke to thee.

Corresponding to iv. &amp;. ^l-tU ore these lines :
Par: Have I thought long to see this mornings fsc^
And doth it now present such prodepes?
Aecurst, unhappy, miaerable man,
Forlome, forsaken, destitute I am:
Borne to the world to be a slave in it.
Distrest, remediles, and unfortunate.
" ' ' ' " " u make tn^ ^



All at ones cry out and yrring their handa,

AU ery: And all our ioy, and all our hope is dead, .

Dead, lost, undone, absented, wholy 9ed,

Cap: Cruel, uniust, impartiall destinies,

Why to this day have yoti preserv'd my life?

To see my hope, my atay, ray ioy, my lite,

Deprivde of sence, of life, of all by death,

Cruell, uniust, impartiall destinies.

Cap; sad fac'd sorrow map of misery.

Why this sad time have I dcsird to see.

This day, this uni'ist, this impartiall day

Wherein I hop'd to see my comfort full.

To be deprivde by suddaine destinie.

Moth: O woe, alacke, distrest, why should I live?

To see this day, this miserable day.

Alacke the time that ever I was borne.

To be partaker of this destinie,

Alacke the day, aloeke and welladay.

Corresponding to v. 3. 13-J are the following lines i
Par.- Sweete Plo-^er, with flowers I strew thy Bridale bed;
Sweete Tombe that in thy circuite dost containe.
The perfect modell of eternitie:

Faire luliet that with Angells dost ri

Accept this latest favour at my hands,
That living houourd thee, and being dead
With tunerall prunes doo adorne thy Tombe.



.Google



APPENDIX B

EARLIER VERSIONS OF THE STORY
Tabulab View

Shaktipeare compared vnlk Brooke and Painitr

Note. — Below is an attempt to represent graphically the agree*
ment between Romto and Juliet and earlier versions of the same
story by Arthur Brooke and William Painter. In the tirst column
are rei^rences to the play, while in the second the corresponding
passages in Brooke's poem are indicated. In the second column

passages enclosed thus • ■ refer to matter I'ontained in Brooke

alone and not in Painter, or his immediate source, Boaistuau. No
table, however, can satisfactorily present the situation, for not
only tias Shakespeare changed numerous details of the story that
cannot be represented in tabular form, but also his inspiration Ibr
a phrase or an incident is frequently to be found at some point in
Brooke far removed from the context, for example, the wording .
at iv. £. S4~90, was undoubtedly suggested by Brooke, IL 3507-
14 ; but the foundation of that scene was laid for Shakespeare in
IL 8403-72.

SnAKEBPEABE BeOOKI

Prologue, 1-14. Argument, U. 1-14.

L 1. 1-87. 11. 955-S2.

S8-ie5. ....

166-2*4. 89-154,.



APPENDIX B



S. 1-A5.

$6-113.
114-*6.
Prolo^e to JL



-631-73. —

- 674-70*. _
743-72.



1-64.

65-78.
19-848,
1-43.
44-126.



49-87.
68-310.



lOTi-162.

1239-34.
•—1257-510.-
by 8256-7ftl



1791-808.
1887-2004.
[suggested by 2365-72.]
2005-191.1
3199-855.
8313-408.
• — 88S1-I.— •
2403-72.
2515- 96.&gt;
0473-503.



2613-30,



8631-3080.



' Brooke nowhere iDdicates how Iohb the force of the poffder
would last, whQe Fainter says it would continue "forty hours at
the leaat," and Shakespeare, iv. 1. 105, m^es it "two and forty

' Piunter makes Romeo pay the Apothecary fifty ducats; Shake-
speare, V, 1, 59, forty ducatai Brooke, 1, 2577, fifty crowns il foli

\



APPENDIX B



1. Brooke's Bommu and Jidiet

Arthur Brooke's Momeiu and Juliet is a poem of 3020 lines, of
dix or seven feet each, rhymed in couplets. It was first printed at
London in 1562. The text of the poem is prei^eded by a prose
address to the reader, which, in pointing the moral of the story,
, strongly denounces its hero and heroine for neglecting the advice
. of parents and friends and concealing their marriage. Then comes
I an apparent reference to an earlier play on the subject, which is
. discussed elsewhere in this volume (Inlroduetion, pp.xL-xiii). An-
other address to the reader, in verse, informs hira that Brooke has
written other works, but this, " the eldest of them," is the first
to be offered to the public, " The Ar^ment," composed of four-
teen rhymed pentameter lines, briefly sets forth the plot. The
poem itself follows.

It opens with a picture of Verona, happy under the rule of
Prince Elscalus, but disturbed by strife between the Capulets' and
and Montagues.'- Their wiath the Prince tried to assuage by
gentle means and persuasion, but when tliese availed not, " by
thund'ring threats and princely power."^ Meanwhile Romeus, a
Montague, an unt&gt;earded youth, famous for his beauty, fell in love
with a feir maiden.' To her he wrote, sent messages, and went in
person to plead for grace, but she would not grant him a friendly
I.xik. The more she retired, the more he was pricked on. Ailer
many months, " hopeless of his recure," he thought to leave
Verona, hoping that thereby he might quench the fire in his
tM&gt;som. But he doubted whether to take this Step. " He mount
tlu day, he maket tk» long and ineary night." His kindred and
allies knew not what ailed him. One, " the trustiest " of his com-
panions, " far more than he with counsel filled, and riper of his
years,"* rebuked Romeus for bo wasting away the best part of his
age. For Romeus's own sake, and for his father's sake he coun-

' Brooke has Capdd, Cajrilet, Capd; Montagetc, Montagewe, Mon-
tegue, Montague, etc. Mr. J. J, Munro, in the latest edition of the
poem, The lahakespeare Clasaics (London, I90S), modernizes the spell-
ing, and is here followed.

* Apparently a bint from which Shakespeare built the whole con-
flict in i, 1. But the events of the latter resemble those of the fight
which resulted in Tybalt's death.

* Rosaline is not named.

* "Benvolio is not named b^ Brooke or Painter. Fuller states
that he corresponds to Jacomo in the Dutch play.



196 APPENDIX B

selted the youth to nmore the veil of Iotc which blinded bim. or
else to bestow his heart elsewhere. To these words Romeus iiitened
attentively, and piedged himself to frequent feasts by day, bao-
quets by night, and to resort everywhere that ladies were wont to
meet. AU that he saw he would like indiffewntly, viewbgthem
" with unallured eye."

"The weary winter nights restore the Christmas games," aod
the season invites " townish dames" to banquet. Capd.
i. 3, the chief of his house, began the banqueting. There
was no lady or Icnight in Verona that Capel did not
himself bid to the feast, or invite "by his name in paper sent"
Yet not a Montague would enter the gate, " save Rom-
i. 4. eus, and he in mask with hidden face," together with five
companions pressed thither. Alter masking awhile, all
nnmasked and showed themselves to the ladies, though "bashful
KomeuE " withdrew into a nook. There the bright torches dis-
closed him to every one, and ladies wondered at his shape and
beauty, and also at his courage in putting himself among so many
foes. The Capulets disdained his presence, yet sup-
i. 5. pressed their ire, being loth, perhaps, to offend that
guests, or perhaps fearing the Prince's wrath. Rumeua.
observing the ladies carefully, at length saw one of whom he told
himself her " like n# halh, tie akalt be *«™, «e liveth in out days."
While he looked on her. his former love was quite driven out Not
bold enough to ask her name, Romeus fed his eyes on her. Juliet,
for so was the damsel called, cast eyes on him and was touched
by Love's arrow. A comely knight now led Juliet forth to dance,
and Romeus took a place near the seat that must be hers after the
measure was done. At one side of her chair then sat Romeo,'
while on the other side sat one Mercutio :

"A courtier that each where wan highly had in price.
For he was courteous of his speech, and pleasant of device.
Even as a lion would among the lambs be bold.
Such was among the bashful maids Mercutio to behold." *

Mercutio seized Juliet's right hand, although by nature his own
hands were twice as cold as "frozen mountain ice." Romeus
thereupon oAught her left hand. She pressed his palm in reply,
and seeing that Love kept him silent, she opened her mouth to



APPENDIX B 197

bless the time of his ranting. Inquiring the reason he learned
&amp;om her that her hand had been frozen by Mercutio's but was
warmed by his. In response, Roraeus affirmed that the love for
her in his heart was far warmer than his hand. Juliet assured
him that she was his, and, " mt/ honuur aaeed," ready to obey his
will. KomeuB asking of some her name, was dismayed to find
that her father was a Capulet. He railed on Fortune and Love,
but was glad that he served "not a cruel one, ai he had done of
old. " The maid likewise desiring to learn his name, called her old
Nurse. " Whoi, taain are tho/«," she asked, " v&gt;liich presi unlo
the door ? " Then she inquired the t»me of the one •' in miislanff
meed," and was answered, " //« tiame is Romeiu ... a Mon-
lofftte." With a show of joy " she cloaked inward smart," so that
neither mother nor Nurse descried the hidden harm.

Then Juliet went to bed but not to sleep, pondering over her
wretched state. She questioned whether in the person
ii. 3. of Romeus she had not been stung by a snake, whose
purpose was to stain her honor b}- subtle sleight. But
she concluded that this could not be in one of such perfect shape
and beauty. Besides, she had seen in his face sure signs that he
loved her. Finally she decided to love and serve him if he would
make her his wife, for she hoped that this new alliance would
bring " unto ovr fiotise&gt; »aek a peace as ever ikall endare," By this
time Roraeua had forsaken his weary bed, and passing with linger-
ing steps by Juliet's home, cast his eyes up to her window, where
he espied his love, and was greeted with pleasant cheer. Often
passing so through the coming days, in a happy hour he espied a
garden plot which " fronted full upon her leaning plice." Thither
he went by night unafraid, for " ichom maketk Loi&gt;e not hold?"
Leaning out of her window one evening, Jul'iel: beheld her lover in
the bright moonlight and rejoiced to see him. But her tirst words
were to reprove his recklessness. " What if i/mir deadly foei, my
kintmen, tarn you here f " Romeus replied that if need should arise,
he could defend himself, but that life was not so dear that he
-nould desire to live if he might sacrifice it for her sake. Juliet
declared her heart knit to him, adding that if wedlock were his
end, " Both me and mine I will alt whole to you betake. And fot-
lovriTtff you tehertto you go, my father's house forsake." But she
warned him to cease his suit if his intent was not honorable. At
this Romeus rejoiced and promised to go before sunrise to Friar
Laurence, his "ghostly lire," for advice ; then to return at the
game hour next night and tell her of it.



198 APPENDIX B

This barefoot triax wns a doctor of divhiity, acquainted with the

secrets of nature, and beloved by an Verona. Of Romeus

il. 3. he was specially loved, and him the Friar liked best of aJI

Verona youth. Romeus told him the lovers' whole story
and with weeping eyes prayed hiro to aecomplish all their desire,

"A thousand doubts and mo in th' old man's head arose,
A thousand danjcers like to come the old man doth disclose.
And from the spousal rites he redeth him refrain,
Perhaps he shall tie ttet advised within a week or twain.
Advice is banished quite from those that follow love.
Except advice to what they like their bending mind do move.
As well the father might have counselled him to stay
That from a mountain's top thrown down is falling half the way.
As warn his friend to stop amid his race begun.
Whom Cupid with his smarting whip enfon-eth forth to run.
Part won by earnest suit, the friar doth grant at last;
And part, because he thinks the storms, so lately overpast.
Of both the households' wrath, this marriage might appease;
So that they should not iai;e again, but quite for ever cease.
The respite of a day he asketh to devise

What way were best, unknown, to end so great an enterpriae," '
I
Meanwhile Juliet unwrapped the secrets of her heart to the
Nurse, who was won " with promised hire " to hide them
ii. 4. in her breast. To Komeus the Nurse was sent tn learn
the Friar's advice and the plan for marriage. " On Sot-
vrdai/," quoth Romeus, "if Jutkt come in shrifi, sheihail bt ahrivtd
and married." Such a crafty wile pleased mif^htily the Nurse,
who promised to devise some excuse to have her come. Then she
began tiabbling of Juliet's early years.



At last this talk wearied even Romeus, who drew from his
pocket six crowns of gold ; for this gift she bowed bw.
ii. 6. To Juliet she then hied, and closing the door began to
praise the shape and the face of Romeus. The giri an-
swered that so she had ever thought, but what of the marriage?
" Sofl," replied the Nurse, " I fear your hurt (y trtdden Joy." Ju-
liet affirmed that she desired not to play, and learning that the
wedding was no further olf than Saturday, rejoiced greatly.

' Munro, !I. 697-618.



APPENDIX B 199

On Saturday Juliet got her mother's consent to go to shiift,

with the Nurse and a maid. Asking if Friar Laurence
ii. 6. had leisure^ to hear her shrift, she was taken into his

cell, while the Nurse and the maid were left outside.
In the cell Romeus was already waiting; to him •^Eaah miitut*
aeemtd an hour, and every hoar a day." The lovers then made
confession ta the Friar, and they were married. Romeus now
asked hia wife to send the Nurse to hira again that afterncKin to
get a ladder of cord, by which at night he would climb to her
window. The day seemed long to the lovers, "eaek hour teemi
tiomUi/ year."

At the appointed hour Romeus walked to Capulet's garden. " so

light he wDx he leapt the wall," climbed the ladder, and
ilL 5. met his wife. Juliet had " the waxen quariers" lighted

that she might behold her husband's beauty. Embracing
him she declared i



£ach talked for some time. Thus the night passed.



Romeus then took his leave but came again at the same hour eveiy
other night until misfortune overtook him.

Their bliss lasted oniy a month or twain. On the morning after
Easter Day Tybalt, the Capulet's leader, called to his

iii. 1. followers to wreak vengeance on the Montagues, and
himself ted the furious charge. On each side the fray
was long and stout. Hearing the noise. Romeus ran to the place
of combat with a few companions, and they were moved with pity
for the great slaughter. " Pari, friends," cried Romeus, but the
combatants heard him not. Then he leapt into the throng to part
and bar the blows. Tybalt thrust at him and would have pierced
him through had not Romeus worn a coat of mwl. " / InU part the
yVoy," quoth Romeus. " No, eoieard, traitor, 6oy,"replied Tybalt,
striking a blow at his head, Romeus returned the blow, they
fought savagely, until Tybalt fell, slain by a thrust through the

' a. iv. 1. 37.

' Ct. ii. 8. 7-8. Romeo's challenge to Fate just before the wedding.

&gt; Ct. iii. 2. Iff.; iii. 5. Iff.



200 APPENDIX B

throat. Before the Prince the Capulets brought Tybalt's corpse,
craving punishment for the slayer of their kinsman. The Mon-
tagues pleaded Romeus free of fault. Lookers-on asserted that
Tybalt began the fight. But the Prince sentenced Romeus to exile,
and charged both households on peril of their lives to cease

the strife. News of these events caused grief every-
iii. 8. where ; but most of alt to Juliet, who tore her hair and

rent her clothing, bewailing Tytialt's death and denounc-
ing Romeus, Again repenting she blamed herself for touching the
honor of her husband's name. Tybalt she pronounced faulty and
Romeus guiltless. Then she swooned away, and some time
later was found by the Nurse, who revived and comforted her.
" Tybalt, yourjriend, is dead,'" quoth the old woman, " lehat, veei
yoit by youT teara to eaU him Imck again .^ " &gt; She dared say that
Komeus within a month or two would be called back from exile,
and she urged Juliet to arm herself with patience. At her own
suggestion, she was sent to Laurence's cell, where Romeus lurked.
Laurence had bestowed Romeus in a place hidden and sealed.

When the Nurse came he sent Juliet word that Romeus
ill. 3. would visit her again that night at the usual hour. Then

the Friar, shutting the door, gave to Romeus the tidings
of his banishment. Hearing this, Romeus tore his hair, beat his
breast on the ground, rose and struck his head against the walls,
fell down again, and called for speedy death. The Friar tried to
repress him but spoke to the air. With sobs and faltering tongue
Romeus blamed Nature, the time and place of his birth, the crud
son of Venus, Fortune, himself for not being Elain in the light &lt;rilh
Tybalt. In short, he blamed all the world but Juliet Then the
Friar broke in :

'"Art thou,' quoth he, 'a man* Thy shape saith, jo 1k(m art;
Thy crying and thy weeping eyes denote a woman's heaii , . ,
So that I stood in douhl this hour, at tlie least.
If thou a man or woman inert, or else a brutish beast.' " *

He reminded Romeus how valiantly he had slain his foe, while he.
himself remaned unhurt, and upbraided him for blaming Low
and his fate. Then, like the Nursed he foretold that Ronieu
would be called home "vnth dmMe honor'' in a short time; To
this counsel Romeus gave ear and soon ceased to weep.

' It is Lady Capulet who uses this argument to Juliet in iii. 5. Tl
' Note Shakaspeare's compression of the same thought, iii. 3, 108-
IL



APPENDIX B 201

During the visit to his wife the same night, Juliet begged that
she might oi'i^ompany him in disguise to Mantua. But
iii. 5. Romcus would not listen to this plan for fear of pursuit
and the cruel punishment of both by Capulet. He
promised that he would, by the help of friends, within four months
be recalled with honor. Fair Lucifer, the morning star, dawned
too soon and the lovers parted. Ron^eus. disguised as a merchant-
venturer, walked out of Verona's gates and nn to Mantua, whence
he sent his man with words of comfort to the Friar. There Ro-
meus soon told his story to the Duke and be^an plotting for his
pardon. But his fortune he ceased not to bewail. At Verona
Juliet likewise mourned, growing so pale that hermother besought
her to forget Tybalt's death. Juliet replied that she had shed " the
ia.it of Tybalt'e tears," and henceforth they should not gush out
" In/ eonduita of the eyne,"

Unable to get at the root of her daughter's sorrow, the mother

begged Capulet to provide a husband for the girt, thinking that

her grief was wrought by envy of her married companions. The

old man rejoined that these things had often been on his

i. 8. mind, but that he thought Juliet, who was scarce sixteen

years old, " too t/ounij to be a bride.' Howsoever, he

would tr7 to tind some one to cure her sickness. Conferring with

his friends, he discovered many who wished his daughter's hand

because she was both fair and wise, and her father's only heir. Of

all the suitors he liked best the County Paris, and promised to do

all in his power to bring about a match between him and Juliet.

The wife joyed to receive the tidings.

l.ady Capulet straightway hied to Juliet, telling her the plan of
" her careful, loeiiig father" end praising Paris's person,
iiL S. his features, and his gifts of fortune. But when Juliet
perceived her parents' intent, she thought that she would
rather be torn asunder by wild horses than be forsworn. So she
answered her mother with unaccustomed boldness. Rather th.'in
grant him to possess her smallest part, she would stay herself. On
her knees she pleaded that she might be allowed to live as hereto-
fore. Amazed, the mother sought her hust&gt;and and told him all.
&gt;* The testy old man, wroth," ordered the maid to be brought in at
once. Juliet came willingly but fell weeping and grovelling at his
feet. The father, calling her unthankful and disobedient, and re-
minding her of the power Roman fathers had over their children,
declared that " both thou and I unvjorthj/ are too much " of Paris,
and swore that if " bi/ Wednesday next," at " cur castle called Free-



80S APPENDIX B

tamn" she would not assent to Paris'a suit, he wonid frlve «1I he i
had " away from her," and then " wed " her for life to a close and
haid j'aU.^ Then lather and mother departed, and Juliet iought
her chamber to eke out the night with weeping.

Early in the morning she again went to the Friar, and to him '
poured forth all her grief, threatening to end her life that

'v. I. day. Alarmed, the Friar went to his chamber and med-
itated on the danger to her. to Romeus, and to himself if
the bruth were made public. At last pity won his heart, and tak-
ing out of his oloset a httle glasa containing a certain powder, he
returned to Juliet. Charging her to keep this secret from all, ,
even the Nurse,^ he advised her to cast off fear, and early on her
marriage day, to fill the vial with water and drink it off. In half
an hour she would fall into a slumber, which her kinsmen and
friends would take for death. She would be buried in the cosllj
tomb of her forefathers, and there rest until Romeus eame from
Mantua and with the Friar took her unharmed from the tomb.
Then she and Romeus might go to Mantua and live there in secret j
until time came to make the news known. To this plan Juliet
gladly assented.

Meeting her mother on the return home, the girl told her that ,
she had confessed her sins to the Friar and had promised

Iv. 2. to be ordered by him. Therefore, though she had laag
forsworn the rite of marriage, she was now willing toobej
her mother's will and to marry the County at the appointed time 1
and place. She would now go to her closet to pick out " th» bmvit
garments and ths richest jeiEula there." Much pleased, ■• the ample
mother " ran to give the news to Capulet, who in turn bore the
tidings to Paris. He craved that he might visit Juliet at once. On
her mother's advice Juliet gave Paris her most courteous speech
and pleasant looks. Thus she so stole his away heart that be
prayed the parents "the wedlock knnl to knit soon up,"' Grwt
preparations were made for the wedding ; there were such rich
attire, such furniture, such abundance of dainties as one could widl
for. Nothing seeroed too dear for purchase.

To her Nurse Juliet told the same story as to her parents. The
Nurse declared that she had done well, praising Paris ten time)
more than she had praised Romeua. Why should she languish for
Romeus, who would not return? These wicked words greitlj

■ Cf. iii. 5. 141.

' In Shakespeare the motivation is much better. Juliet loaa
her confidence in the Nurse. &gt; Cf. iv. S. 21.



APPENDIX B 203

"dis-eased" Juliet When the bride percdved her hour ap-
proach, she told the Nurse that she desired to sleep
i^. 3. alone that night since she purposed to pray to " tlig
hsavenly minds " for their smiles " vpon the doinffa of to-
morroiD,"! The Nurse .then went away and shut the door. Fol-
lowing the Friar's directions Juliet oow made the mixture, but nos
Euddmly shaken by a deadly fear of the course she had resolved
on. What if the powder failed to work P "is there any one," she
asked herself, " »o mvcb jiait hop* aiit"^ She became fearfiM of
serpents, of the loathsome air of the tomb wh»« her ancestors
rested; she foresaw the danger of stifling before the coining of
Romeus and the Friar.

" And wkiltt die in these thoughts dotk dwell sommrhal lt)o long.
The farce qf her imbmning did wax anon so strong.
That ike mrmised she taa; out of the hoUom vault,
A grisly thing to took upon, the carcase of Tybalt;
Right in the idfaame tort that she few days before
Had seea him in his blood embrued. to dcalk eke wounded sore.
ATid then vJien the again within herself had weighed
Th/ii quick she should be buried there, and by his side be laid,
AU comfortless, for she shall living fere hare none.
But many a rotten carcase, and full many a naked bone;
Her dainty lender parts gan shiser ail for dread.
Her golden hairs did stand upright v.p&lt;m her ckUlish head.
Then presstd tcHh the fear that she there lined in,
A sweat as cold as mountain ice pierced through her slender slcin.
That with the mature hath wet ecery part of hers:
And more besides, she vainly thinks, ^ilst vainly thus she fears,
A thojtsand bodies dead ha^ compassed her dxmt.



By little and little, and in her heart her fear increasfd aye.

Dreading that weakness might, or foolish coicardice.

Hinder the execution cjf the purposed enterprise.

As she had frantic been, in haste the glass she caught.

And up she drank the mixture quite, wilhouten farther thought.

Then on her breast she crossed her arms' long and small.

And so, her senses failing her, into a trance didfaU."

Soon after sunrise the Nurse opened the door, callinj; Bottly, *
then louder, " Lady you sleep too lonq ; the Earl -anil row

IT. 5. you by and by." But she spoke to the deaf, for there lay
Juliet's body stiff and colder than marble. Retuminv
in baste to the mother, with scratched face and torn hair, " Dead,
1 Cf. iv. 3.2-4 • Cf. iv. 1. 45.



«04 APPENDIX B

quoth she, ' u my child.'" Lady Capulet rushed lo her daughter's
bed and waa soon cryinj; out on Death. And while she tfaus
lamented, the father, Paris, and a company of gentleman and ladies
of Verona pressed in to honor the wedding feast ; but hearing the
heavy news they raoumed as if it was the day of wrath. More
than all the rest wa^ the father's heart smitten, so "that he ne
had the power his daughter to bcweep ne yet to speak." If ever
there was a " (amanfoAis day," that was it.

While Juliet slept, Fciar Laurence sent a letter by a trusty friar

of his house to Romeus, in which he wrote of everything

V. S. that had passed, and begged him to come the next night

to take Juliet out of the tomb. Friar John with this

letter hastened to Mantua, but, following an Italian custom, went

to a house there to get another friar to accompany him about the

the town. Having ecitered the house, he might not come out again

because one brother a day or two before had died of the plague,

and all within had been charged not to go outside their convent

gate. Knowing not what the letter held, he deferred till the

morrow to send to Romeus.

Meanwhile Verona was busied about Juliet's obsequies.

"Now M Ike parenia' mirth quite changed into jnonn.
And rune to aorroie is Tc/umed Ike joy of every one;
And lUnD the tsedding weeds for mourning weeds they change.
And Hymene into a dirge; — afas.' it seemeth girange:
Instead of marriage gloia, now funeral gloves they have.
And whom they should tee married, they foUow io the grave.
The feast that should have been of pleasure and of joy.
Hath every dish and cup filled full of sorrow and annoy." '

The l&gt;ody of the girl with uncovered face was borne on the bie( to
theCapulets' tomb. So it came about that Romeus's man, who had
been sent to Verona to .^py out the doings of the Capulets, met his
master's wife on the way to her burial. Because he knew her
death would touch most his master, he "hud avayin
V. 1. post " to cany him the news, announcing that he him-
self had seen her laid within the tomb. With open ears
Romeus too soon received this message ; his spirit was olniott
ready lo break out of its prison house. But the sudden fancy
occurred to him that if he died near her, his death would be s
hundred thousand times more glorious, and his lady better pleased.
Drying his tears he walked abroad, commanding his servant to

&gt; Ct. iv. 5. 34-90



APPENDIX B 205

stay- JD the chamber. At the door of a drug shop sat unbusied an
BpothecBiy, whose poverty Roraeus guessed from his coantenance

and the few boxes displayed. Although the city's law forbade the
sale of poison, Romeus believed that this man might sell what
could not be got by friendship. He therefore offered him fifty
gold crowns to deliver poisoD that would kill in less than a half'
hour one who should devour it. Won by covetise, the wretch
sought poison and gave to Romeus, saying that half of the "speed-
ing gear " would serve to kill in less than a half-hour the strongest
man alive.

Romeus then again sent his man, Peter by name,^ to Verona,
charging him to provide lights and instruments for opening the
tomb, but not to bewray his master's secrets. Ordering ink and
paper. Romeus penned a letter to his sire, telling his whole story
and his plan to take his life. He then hired a post-horse, and
with the shade of night entered Verona, where he met
T. 3, Peter waiting with lantern and tools wherewith to pry
open the tomb. Getting his man's aid in removing the
stone before the sepulchre, Romeus sent him off with strict charge
not to come near him, but'to present the letter to Montague next
day. Now he descended into the tomb and beheld with piteous
eye his wife's body. A hundred times he kissed and embraced
her. At length he drew out the poison and devoured the greater
part. Next calling on Juliet, he affirmed that he could not wish
for a more glorious tomb than to be buried with her. Turning to
Tybalt's corpse, he cried with outstretched hands for mercy, de-
manding to know what more amends the slain man could ask than
to see his slayer poison himself before him. Finally praying
Christ for pily on his sinful soul, he fell dead upon Juliet's corpse.

The Friar knowing the instant that Juliet should waken, but
wondering that he heard not from Romeus, went to the tomb with
meet instruments. Horrified to see a light there, he learned from
Peter that his master had been in the tomb some half-hour. Both
entering found the breathless corpse of Romeus. Just then Juliet
awaking knew Laurence and at once asked, "Where is my
RomeusP" The Friar fearing that they should be taken, pointed
to the corpse and told all that had taken place. He then tried to
instil patience in her. promising to place her in some religious house,
where she could abide the rest of her days in peace. But as soon
as she saw Romeus, "«£e didiaittop tha conduit of her (ear*," she

' Balthasar in Sbakespeure, while Peter is the Nurse's stupid
boy.



sq6 appendix B '

tore her hair, embraced his corpse, and kissed him a thousand
times. Just then the Friar and Peter, hearing a sudden noise,
fled. Left alone Juliet drew the dagger worn by Romeua, and
embracing and kissing him once more, girt her heart through.

The watch, seeing ajight in the tomb, suspected enchanters and
went inside to learn the truth. There they found Romeus and
Juliet dead in each other's arms, and discovering the two mur-
derers, as tliey thought, lodged them that night in a deep dungeon.
Next day the Prince ordered an open examination, and had the
two bodies placed on a high stage. The Friar defended himself in
a long discourse, and his story was borne out by Peter and by the
letter of Roraeus. The Prince then decreed that the Friar and
Peter should go free, but that the Nurse should be banished and
the Apothecary hanged. Friar Laurence '• of himself" retired to
a hermitage, where be died five years later. The Capulets and
the Montagues, now won by pity, forgot their enmity. And the
bodies of Romeus and Juliet were raised into one stately tomb,
which is still to be seen in Verona.



2. PaISTEB'S VEBfflOH OP THE StOBT

The story of " Rhomeo and Julietta " forms the twenty-fiith
novel in the second volume of William Painter's prose Falaf* of
FUature, first published l£67t five years after Brooke's poem. The
novel ia entitled, '"The goodly history of the true, and constant
love betweene Rhoraeo and Julietta, the one of whom diedof poy-
son, and the other of sorrow, and hevinesse i wherein ht comprised
many adventures of love, and other devises touchinge the same."
Painter's version follows closely the French version of Boaistuau,
in his /fistoirasTrayiju*» (1559), which is also the source of Brooke.
But Brooke enlarged on his story and modified it considerably,
where Painter adhered to the original. Thus the differences be-
tween Brooke and Painter are due almost entirely to Brooke's
changes. These differences may be briefly summed up :

So iar as incidents go. Painter does not mi^ntion the bribery of
the Nurse by Juliet or Romeo, says little of the NuKe's visit to
Romeo, nothing of her teasing announcement of Romeo's message
to Juliet, and nothing of Romeo's behavior in the Friar's cell on
hearing his doom of banishment; and he makes Juliet eiftbteen
years old instead of sixteen. As to names of characters Painter
has Rhomeo ; Julietta; Montescbes ; Capellets ; Sefior Escala, or



APPENDIX B 207

Lord Bartholomev of Escala ; Anthonie Capetlet (for Brooke's Old
Capilet, or siniplf Capilet); Thibaultj Pietro or Petre ; Paris, Count
of Lodronne ; Friar Attselm (for Friai John) ; the caetle is Villa-
ftaneo (for Freetown) ; a][ in place of the correspondiag forms in
Brooke. It will be observed that Shakespeare almost invariably
follows the poem. But this is not alt, for Brooke has really created
a living' comic tharacter in the garrulous, vulgar, shrewd old Nurse,
and has given Shakespeare valuable hints for the development of
other characters. Moreover the longer, more prolix narrative of
Brooke contains many details not found in Fainter, and the verbal
similarities noted between Shakespeare and Brooke ore usually not
to be discovered when Painter's version is compared with Shake-
speare's. All this makes it evident that Shakespeuv was followiii(f
Brooke rather than Painter in composing this drama.

But we know that Shakespeare read other stories in the Pataet
ofPleatan, and it would be strange if he had not read this one be-
fore writing a play on ^he same sulgect For sane details, trivial
enough in themselves, Shakespeare wa.s apparently indebted to
Painter, though there is a slight possibility that he read Boaistuau
in the original French. (1) In Painter the Friar tella Julietta that
the powder's force will continue " forty houres at the least," while
in Shakespeare (iv. 1. 105) it is "two and forty hours." Brooke
has no such specilic reference. (3) Painter says Romeo paid ths
apothecary fifty ducat* for his poison, Shakespeare {v. 1. 59) Eias
forty ducats, but Brooice puts it fifty crowns of gold. These de-
tails add something to the natural probability that Shakespeare
read Painter's work.



,,Goo^le



APPENDIX C

THE DUTCH VERSION OF 1631

The Dutch play of Romao tn JulUtU in alexandrine couplets,
was written about 1G3U (published 1634) by Jacob Stmijs. Tlie
ailment that this drama Vi in reulity a foirlj literal translation of
the English play seen by Brooke before 156S is elsewhere' dis-
cussed. While it cannot be said that Dr. Fuller's case ia, in the
lil^ht of present evidenc'C, estabhshed, yet many considerations
make hia theory plausible. The summary of the Dutch play which
follows is based entirely on the more complete summary of De.
FuUer in the article referred to."

TahU thoviinff Ayreem«ttU betmten Skakeepiare and Slntij*

Note, — The table below shows the scenes In Struijs's play that
correspond to scenes in Shakespeare. Scenes in Struijs not hav-
ing correspondence with any part of Shakespeare are bracketed.
The table is based entirely on Fuller's summary of Struijs-



ShAKESI'GABE.

Prologue.



Sntnijs.
Prolo^e.



APPENDIX C



Stbdub's Pi^t

Act I. Scene 1 corresponds to some extent to Shakespeare, 1. 1.
166 ff. Romeo, depressed, ai^knowledges to Phebidas (= Mercutio)
that he is eng^ed in a hnpeiess love. He then recounts the story
of his lirat meeting with Juliette at a banquet in Capellets' house,
to which he went masked, adding that she pressed his hand during;
the evening with araorous sighs. Realizing the irapoBsibility of
any raaniage between the two hostile houses, he is nevertheless
overcome with passion, and walks by Juliette's house each night,
hoping for an opportunity to address her. Phebidas, seeing the
futility of protest, wishes his friend well.

The second scene corresponds to Shakespeare, ii. S. Romeus
under Juliet's window exclaims :

" Oh that the blessed window would once open, behind which
my goddess lies in sweetest slumber '. Through its opening stream-
hig, my bright sun could requicken this half-dead soul of mine. O
my dear love, knowest thou not my passion? Doth thy hep
blood not violently keep tune with miae? Methiuka that,



210 APPENDIX C

my lady in such plight, I should a witness of tt have withtD me.

heavens 1 what do I see? A light in my lady's room begins to
burn; my heart thrills and bounds from f^ and joy. Oh, might

1 once accost my goddess on this spot, then were the burden lifted
from my heart. Soft '. let me listen to n hat she says.

" [Jaliefta leans out of the tuindov.]

•• Jul What troubled voice laments below me here ? Who is it
here goes prowling alone in the darkness and breaks my light
sleep ? Ah, by the moon's light I now see Romeo sheltered, 'neatk
my window standing."'

The remaining incidents of the scene follow as in Shaicespeare-
and Romeo goes away to Friar Lourens to arrange for the mar-
riage. The Friar in the next scene, just as in Shakespeare, li. 3^
soliloquizes for about twenty lines ' uAti] interrupted by the arrival
of Romeo. He reluctantly consents to wed the pair next day.
Scene 4 discovers Capellets, Thibout, and Paris discussing the
feud, especially Romeo's intrusion at the banquet.

" Thibout, Alas I friend Paris, it was the greatest agony for me
not to chastise his impudence on the spot ; my blood boiled froni
top to toe. And if it had not been for dishonoring the company I
would have split his head in two before the eyes of all.

'* CapelleU. It Is better that you did not so.

" Parii. There would have been little honor in it, too.

" Thiboitt. Be it shame or honor, I say it here, and I swear It,
that 1 shall be Romeo's undoing the very next time I meet him ;
or, if not. then he shall make me greet the dust.

" CapelleU. Pardon his youth.

" Parii. He hath done little that is wrong.

" Thihotit. No, my friend, not you nor anyone shall talk me

" CapelleU. Be better advised."'

For some time they continue to converse on kindred subjects,
Juliet entering meanwhile to obtiun her father's permission to at-
tend confession. Then, as the closing scene of the act, follows the
weddingof the two lovers acted in pantomime.

Act iL opens with a monologue by Paris, professing his love for
Juliett&amp; Scene 3 contains the visit of Romeo to his wife's cham-

&gt; Fuller, op. ei(., i&gt;p. 7-8. Ct. ii. t. 8 ft.

' Puller's translation will be found in b note to ii. 3. 1.

• Fuller, op. cii., p. 10. Ct. i. S. 56 ft.



APPENDIX C 211

her on the wedding night Sf^ne 3 prepares fin- the conflict be-
tween the Capellets and the Montescheii, Paris trying in vain to
quell the spirits of his own party. In the following sc'ene Phebidas
aad a party of Montesches after an evening of pleasure, are at-
tacked by the Capellets under Tbibout. Romeo enters just in time
to see Phebidas killed by Thibout He tries to separate the com-
batants, but is Ibroed to fight, and ends by slaying Thibout.

Act iii. opens with the judgment of Romeo's perpetual banish-
ment from Verona. The next scene may be compared with Shake-
speare, iii. 2, beginning with Juliette's lament far Thibout and
denunciation of Romeo, followed by her repentance, and closing
with the Nurse's going out to meet Romeo in the Friar's cell. The
arrangement of the succeeding scene la almost identical with
Shakespeare, ilL 3. Romeo at the cell of Lourens is raving over
the news of his banishment, denouncing Fortune, and longing for
death. The Friar, unable to calm him, is alarmed by a knock at
the door. It comes from the Nurse, who reports JuHette in the
game lamentable state as Romeo,' and the latter promises to visit
his wife that night despite the Friar's opposition on account of the
danger involved.

Act iv. Scene 1, like the first part of iii. 5 in Shakespeare, shows
the lovers' last meeting in Juliette's chamber. Romeo refuses to
let his wife accompany him as a page to Mantua, and they sorrow-
fully parL Next Paris comes forward to tell us that Juliette has
been promised to him, and Romeo in another monologue bids fare-
well to Verona. Scene 4, Capellets expresses his indignition at
Juliette's declining to obey his will, and threatens her with disin-
heritance if she persists. Then Lourens, in conversation with Ju-
liette, proposes the sleeping potion as a means to escape the second
marriage, and she consents to take it. The closing scene of the
act, resembling Shakespeare, iv. 2. shows elaborate preparations
for the wedding, amidst which the father sends word to Paris that
Juliette is now willing for the match. Paris, delighted, comes to
visit her.

Act V. Scene 1, Juliette dismisses the Nurse in order to take the
sleeping potion, after the Nurse has advised her to go ahead and
marry Paris. But the girl is overiMjme by fear. The ghost of
Thilxiut appears, rebukes her for secretly wedding his enemy, and
foretells her death, Juliette, calling upon Romeo, drinks ofF the
potion. The next scene corresponds to Shakespeare, iv. S. The

' Cf . note on iii. 3. 71 ff.



212 APPENDIX C

Nurse, attempting' to wake Juliette, finds hei appareotlf dead.
Friends come in and lament her, a physician pronnunces the death
due to melancholy. In Scene 3, I'riar Lourens deliver3 to Ansel-
mus a letter for Rijmeo at Mantua, Romeo, in the following scene,
learning from Pedro of Juliette's death, utters a long lament, and
departs in search of poison, Anselmus announces in a monolt^ue
that through delay he has missed Romea " Then, in the final
scene, we see Romeo in the act of forcing an entrance to Juliette's
tomb, Pedro, meanwhile, airald of seeing spooks, has withdrawn
a little way, in hopes of falling; asleep and of thereby dispelling his
fears. In the tomb Romeo addresses tender words to Juliette.
and after kissing her many times, and after begging forgiveness of
Thibout's body, he drinks the poison, commends his soul to God,
and dies. Juliette then awakes, but, finding her lord dead, she
stabs herself with his sword. At this point Friar Lourens enters ;-
he wakes up Pedro and from him learns of Romeo's mistake. In
utter despair he bids Pedro teU the parents of the lovers what a
dreadful misfortune this feud has led to; expresses the wish that
peace may now reign betweeo the two ferailies j and reatdves here-
with to retire to some solitary place, because he feels partially
guil^ for this tragedy " (Fuller).



" ~..GcK,gle



APPENDIX D. METRE

I. Shaeespeabe's Gevebal Usage

Shakespeare's dramas in general are saii to be written in poeby,

but a certain proportion of each play is prose. As a rule, when

Shakespeare uses prose, the subject-matter is not serious. Clowns,

servants, and people held to t&gt;e of low social rank, ernplof

Prose, prose throughout the plays. So in Romeo and Jti/Ut we
should expect the quarrelsome servants in i. 1. Potpon
and his fellows in L 5, Peter and the musicians in Iv. 5, to speak in
prose. In the same class faE also most of the Nurse's speeches,
though sometimes, following a well-established contemporary dra-
matic convention, her vehicle is a type of crude blank verse. Mer-
cutio, spewing in i. 4, utters his fancies in lines of rare poetry, but
the mere chaff of his jesting in ii. 4, and the opening of iii. I, is
lightly conveyed in plain prose. When one discovers a prose pas-
sage in the drama, justification for its use cau be found in the con-
tent of the speeches.

All of Shakespeare's dramas likewise contain a certain number
of rhymed verses. Particular cases of rhyme require different ex-
planations. His earlier works shiiw a greater proportion of rhymed
UneE than do his later, because the rhymed couplet was the con-
ventional metre of the English drama immediately before
Rhyme. Shakespeare, just as it was in the later drama of Dryden
and Congreve, In his first plays, then, Shakespeare
made large use of the couplet, gradually discarding it as he went
on writing. But two special uses of the couplet are found even in
the latest plays : one or two couplets forming a '■ rhyme-tag," as
In V. 1. 95-6, served to put the audience on notice that the scene
was terminated ; and sententious obsenrations. like those of the
Friar, ii. 3. 1-30, are given more point in rhyme than in blank
verse. Moreover, the lighter, lyrical touch of some passages is
better brought out in rhyme than in the more stately and dignilied
blank verse. Thus the rhyming sonnet-structure of the dialogue
between Romeo and Juliet, i. 5. 94-113, befits the o.
S13



211 APPENDIX D

But the Dormal metre of all Shakespeare's plays is blank verse.
— that is to say, each line contains five disayllabii: feet, with the
stress on the second syllable of the foot, aad the lioes are un-
rhyraed. Thus the accent falls regularly on the second, fourth.
sixth, eighth, and tenth syllables of the line, and every two sylla-
bles compose a foot. A typical Une may be scanned :



He jests' [ at sears' || that nev'- | er felt' | a wound', |

The pause after the second foot (" at scars "), it will be noticed, is
just a little longer than any other until the end of the
Blank line is reached. This raid-line pause is called the ctBrora,
Verse : and generally can be found after the second or the third
Type. foot. The pause at the close of the line, which is usually
stronger than the atiura, is known aa the end-patue.
The scansion of English verse depends chiefly on the accentuation
of individual words and on the sense of the complete lines.

Difficulties met with in the scansion of many lines are due to the
ignorance of the pronunciation of particular words in
Eliza- EliM-bethan English. To an American such difficulties
bethan are increased because of the differences between his own
Pronun- countrymen and the English in pronouncing words that
elation, are spelled alike by both. It must be rememl&gt;ered that
in the past three centuries English spelling has changed
far less than English pronunciatinn. Much of Shakespeare, enun-
ciated as it must have been in his own day, would sound strange

In most words at the present time usage has fined the accent on
one syllable, so that the word is never accented differently by care-
ful speakers. But in Eliaabethan times much more latitude was
permissible, and a poet could adopt either pronunciation of a word
that suited his metrical scheme. For example, to-day we make a
dear disUnction in meaning between the two verbs, eon'jure and
mtnjur*', but Shakespeare in this play uses on'jnre {ii. 1. 6 and
ii. 1. 39) in the modem sense of conjurf, while fii. 1. 96) he has
conjured' in exactly the same sense. The accentuation of a given
word thus depends largely on its position in the line. For pro-
nouncing adjectives a convenient rule is that stated by Schmidt
{Shakeafieare Leincfm, vol. ii. Appendix), that where an adjective
precedes a monosyllabic noun, or a noun accented on the first
syllable, the adjective is not to be accented on the last syllabh



APPENDIX D 215

Some words through contraction or elurriDg:, not indicated in the
Shorten- **™*' '""^ ""^ "^ '■*'*' syllables. Towardt (i. 1, 131)
ine and ^°^ learrani (iv, 5. 1) are proljably to be treated as

Lengthen- mono sfllables. Contraction of two hastily pronoimced
ing Words, words probably explains i. 5. 27 j thus !

You're wel' | come gen' | t'l'menl Come', | muai'- |
cians, play'l

In certain words having a very light syllable, this syllable may
be either slurred over or brought out strongly. The two names,
Romeo and Juliet, are each generally di^tsyllabic, but each one
appears as a trisyllable in some lines at the play. Line ii. 6. 9.
contains both vi'-o-Unl' and vi'-olent, pronounced in three syllables
and two syllables respectively.

Between two vowels, (ft, c, w, and k are frequently dropped, and
the vowels coalesce in one syllable. So such words as hiiaven, devil,
*«Mr, litlifT, may be taken as having one syllable or two, according
to the demands of the metre. By similar vowel coalescence fire,
friar, and hour arc usually treated as monosyllabic, though friar
is dissyllabic in v. 3. 181. Words ending in -ion, -tiu, or -I'otw gen-
erally have a fixed pronunciation for us. In Shakespeare's day
these suffixes were treated as one syllable or as two indifferently.
So the word diniwm (ill. 5. 29) was pronounced in four sjllables
thou^ we never allow it more than three. Similarly ihe-ed of the
past participle in many verbs might be made into a separate sylla-
ble or not atcording to rhythmii' exigencies.

A converse lengthening process developed extra syllables occa-
sionally. Between the liquids I, m, n, r, and another consonant,
an intermediate vowel sound soraetimes appeared. Enlranet \a
i. 4. it is to be pronounced enteraiiee though it has only two sylla-
bles in V. 3. HI. One must not expect either the contraction or
the lengthening to be marked in the printing of the text.

But much of the seeming irregularity of Shakespeare's verse is
undoubtedly due to a deliberate intention on his part to
Variety, introduce variety. Every reader of Pope's poetry, owing
to the ceaseless regularity of its rhythmic beat, must
feel the monotony of the measure. Pope's aim was to be "a
correct poet," and as a rule no alteration can make his lines met-
rically smoother. But Shakespeare would not be bound by every
petty rule of the strict prosodiat, and his poetrj- is more naturaU
more flexible, and more genuinely rhythmical on that account.



216 APPENDIX D



s this variety is gained in the insertion of ao extra, un-
stressed syllable, vhich ia to be humed over in the read-
Syllables, ing of the line. This may appear at the cwmra :

Bui thou' I slew'st Tyb' (alt) ; || there' art | thou
hap' I py too' (iii. 3. 138).

It is more common, however, at the end of the line, forming what
. is technically called the "feminine ending."

And there' I an end'. I But what' I say you' I to Thurs'fday)?
(iii. 4. 88).

ConT&gt;ersely, an unstressed half-foot is sometimes omitted immedi-
ately after a pauses The pause realty makes up for the omitted

sy liable^

ANurse'! | A Wife'! | What, ho'! [ What, nurse,' ] I 3ay'(iv.4.e3).

A more frequent derice of the poet to avoid monotony is to

vary his stress, Sometiraea the accent is to be placed on

Stress, the &amp;%t syllable, instead of the second, in one or more

of the feeL

Ist. Turn' thee, | Benvo' | Uo, look' | upon' | thy death' (i. 1. 7*).
1st and 3d. Love' ia | a smoke' |{ raised' with | the fume' j of
sighs' (i. I. 196).

Stress inversion occurs most frequently in the first foot, and
somewhat less frequently, immediately ajter the axaura.

Many Unes have in certain feet weak stresses substituted for the
usual Strang stress.

Togeth' I er with' | the ter' | ror of' | the place' (iv. S. 38).
Occasionally such weak stresses are balanced by two long stresses
in an adjoining foot i

re' clouds' | with' his | deep' sighs' (i. 1-

Again variety may be gained by the shifting of pauses, i. ». Hie
cfFgura or the end-line pause. Thus the shiit of cOtura horn its
regular position is exemplified :



When the end-pause is lacking, we have what is known
tat-on or matopped line, common in the latest of Shake-



APPENDIX D 217

speare's playa, such as The Ttmput and Coriolatau, but more com-
mon still in the dramas of Beaumont and Fletcher. Bmneo and
Julist, being an early play&gt; contains only a few such versesi :
I wake before tbe time that Romeo
Com&lt;- to redeem me P (iv. 3. 31-2).

Tbe final variation to be mentioned is the breaking up of lines
by means of the dialogue. Thus a line seemingly inc:ompIete be-
becomes metrically perfect when scanned in connettion with the
preceding or the folloMring line ; e. g.



Sometimes part of a line appears to do double duty, serving to
fill out the preceding line and the sucreeding one as well. This
phenomenon Abbott calls the " amphibious section. "

Jul, To-mor | row will | I send. |

Rom. So thrive | my aoul —

Jut. A thou I sand times | good nightl (ii. 3. 15i-5),

Occasionally broken hnes seem to contain six feet, or even more,
but perhaps the extra foot, being parenthetical, is to be left out of
account. Professor E, K. Chambers suggests that the extra words
may be pronounced simultaneously with others.

Jul. I do I beseech | thee —

Nvrte. Mad I am !

Jul. By- ] and-by | I come (u. 2. 151-2).

But even after all these explanations ar» made to cover accentua-
tion, contraction, lengthening, shift of stress and pauses, there re-
' main a ceitain number of lines which cannot be classed
Irregu- as pentameter verse. Sometimes lines have been left in-
larities. complete for the dramatic effect. For example, the last
line of iv. 4-, just before the discovery of the apparently
hfeless body of Juliet is Capulet's order to the Nurse to awaken
the bride :

Make haate, [ I say. | — [ — | — |
The abrupt termination is intentional.

On the other hand. Shakespeare's plays, like Pope'j" poetry, con-
tain a certain small number of six-foot verses, or aUxandrina.
Gmceming these one should be slow to dogmatize. Contraction,



218 APPENDIX D

elision, and slarring may remov'
meter line is spoken by Juliet, i
no hasty utterance :

Belong I ing to I a man, | be { some oth | er name !

Some incomplete or hypennetrical lines may be due to comipFion
of the text, an explanation that seems to apply to iL 5. 15-1 of
this play.

The reader, however, must guard against the assumption that
there ean be one and only one way to scan a line. Often one
is guided by personal taste or preference to choose this method of
seansiCH) rather than that one, and he cannot be sure that the same
consideration will appeal with equal force to a. second reader.
Many lines of classic English poetry may not yield readily to rules
of thumb in disclosing their metrical make-up ; but if one takes
proper account of pauses, ejaculations, and parenthetical words of
address, the rhythm is likely to take care of itself.

II, The Metre of Romeo and Juiut.

In general. liomao and Jtiliet presents no unusual metrical diffi-
culties, for the rhythm as a whole is notably regular. The play
contains a small proportion of prose lines, and a fair amount of
rhyme, arranged both alternately and in couplets. Its most marked
distinction metrically is the number of lyric measures to be Ibund
therein. Particularly the sonnet form is employed several times.
The Prologue of the play, the Prologue to Act ii, and i. 5. 9S-108,
form complete Shakespearian sonnets ; while 1. 2, 46-51, i. i. 93-

9, V. 3. 12-T, and v. 3, 305-10, are isiUUm in verse
Rhyme structure. All thia ai^iues a special interest on Shake-
in Play, speare's part in this form of verse during his composition

of this tragedy. Other lyric measures in the ptay are
something close akin to the npilhalitmmm, or marriage hymn, in
iii. ^. 1-31, and a suggestion of the aabade. or dawn-song, in iii. S,
1 ft. Such lyric notes are of course in thorough harmony with the
general tone of the story. In the 3003 lines printed in Q 3 of
Homeo and Juliet, V)S lines of prose^ have been counted, Sill lines

■ The &amp;gures given here and in the tahle below are based chiefly
on Fumivall's discussion of the subject in his Introduction to Um
Leopold Shakapere. But the percentage of run-on lines in Romeo
and Juliet is approximated from an independent count.



APPENDIX D 219

of blank veree, and 48fi rhymed peotameter lines, or a percentage
of rliyme equalling 19, T.

It ha3 already been stated that a I^rge proportion of rhyme in s
Shakespearian play is one mark of eariy composition. For exam-
ple, Love'a Labour '» Lott, one of Shakespeare's first plays.
Metrical has a rhyme percentage of 6^.2, while Tlu Temprat, per-
Teatafor haps his last play, reaches the percentage of only 0.1.
Date. Had we, then, no other evidence on the question, we
should be inclined to call Roineo and Juliet an early play.
But aevetai other metrical tests throw light on its date. One of
these tests is that of " feminine endings," another of " run-on
bnes," and a third of "light or weak endings." By a feminine
ending is meant the ending of a line where an extra hali-fbot occurs
after the regular pentameter. Thus :

Receive in either by this dear encount | er.

Shakespeare's later works contain many more feminine endings
than do his earlier ones. By a run-on, or unstopped, line is meant
one in which there is no sense-pause at the end of the line.
The run-on lines Increase rapidly as Shakespeare continues to
write. A light ending verse is one not feminine that ends with an
auxiliary or some similar word which cannot be emphasised in
the reading ; such are ; am, he, I, eince. A weak ending is one
where the stress is even less ; conjunctions and prepositions, like
and, as, at, hy, nor, placed at the ends of lines, form weak endings.
Now a table of comparison on these points between the three
plays mentioned shows :

Nimcofplaj PcrcentagB ot Percentage of No.ofliglil No.otweak

Romeo and Jnlint 7.30 13.T 6 1

Lote's Laboar'a Lutt i. S.3 3

Tht Tempest 3i, 24.8 42 35

While one cannot rely on these tests absolutely, but must use
them to confirm other and weightier evidence:, they are helpful in
making clear the relative chronological positions of many plays.
In this case they confirm the placing of Itomeo and Juliet as one of
the early plays, though later than Love'f Labour') Loet.

Below are listed several lines which may l&gt;e difficult at first to
scan properly. Most of them will be observed to be speeches of
the Nurse, whose rudely formed blank verse requires frequent



APPENDIX D



I bid' ! WhereV | this girl' ? 1 What, Ju-' |

or possibly,

God' for I bid' ! A | A Where 's'

2. {L 3, 13) And yet' | tOw.my t

j but four'.

3. (i. 3. 17) Come I^m' | maa-eve' | at night' | shall^she^be' |

fourteen'.

4. (i. 3. 85) Of alL' | the days' [ o' the year' [ upon' | that da/.

5. (i. 8. 87) Sit'ting I i'thesun' I un'der I thedove'- I houaewall'!

6. (i. 3. 36) For then' | she^ could stand' | alone' ; [ nay', by | lie

7 (i. 5. 18) J Wel'come, | genti'(e)men ! I la'dies | that have' | their

8. (ii. 5. 31) My back' I o' t' oth(e)r' I side, - O,' | my back', [

my back' !
B. (iii. a. 87) AAll' | forsworn', [ all naught', | all'dia | aem'(bleis).

10. (iii. 5. 178) ADay', | Anight', j Ahour', | tide,' time', | work',

11. (iv. 6. i) Mis'fress ! | what, mis' | tress ! Ju' | liet ! fast,' 1 1

warr(a)nt' | her, she'.

No. 11 appears to be an alezandriae.



,,Goo^le



GLOSSARY



it' (i. S. 40). he; a corruptioii

of the pronoun,
affray (iii. 5. 33), frighten,

make afraid. Anglo-Fr.

afrayer, effrayer; late Lat.

eifndare, cBstnrb &lt; ex, out of,

+ fridut, peace,
against (iu. 4. 82; iv. 1. 118).

before, ia expectatioii of the

time when. Cf. Hamlet, i
- 158: "ever 'gainst that sea

ambuscado (i. i. 84). i
buscade. " An affected
fashioning of ambuscade
after Sp. Here Englishmen
may have coafuaed the Sp.

Ea. pple. e&lt;!ihotcado, am-
uahed . . . with the tem.
sb. embotcada, ambuscade"
{N. B. Diet.).

amerce (tii. I. 195), punUb by
fining, mulct. A. Fr. amen '
fine, &lt; i, to, + Tnerci, ma

an, or an if (i. 1. 4, etc.; v
fiO), it. Spelled and
Elizabethan Gng.. but
modern spellingdistinguished
from the copula, from which
it is probably derived.

apt (ill. 1. 31; iii. 3. 1S7),
ready, inclined. Cf. Juliut
Catar, iii. 1. 160: " Liva a
thousand years, I shall not
find myself so apt to die

atomy (i. 4. 61), tiny being,
mite. Lat. atomi, (pi.



aiontut,
treated i



1 atom) WBE
an English sin-
A I Yo-a Lika
S: " The frail'st
and softest things. Who shut
their coward gates on
atomies."
bandy (ii. 5. 14), beat to and
fro as a tennis ball. Der-
ivation uncertain but con-
nected with Fr. bander,
which has the same mean-



beet



itie-browB (i. 4. 32), bushy
or prominent eyebrows. See
discussion of word in N. E.
Diet.

behoreful (iv. 3. 8), suitable,
required,

beshrew (ii. 5. 62; iii. B. 223,
S26), curse; a mild impreca-
tion.

biU (i. 1. SO), " A kindofpiks
or balbertj formerly car-
ried by the English infan-
try, and afterwards the
usual weapon of watchmen"
(Nares). A. S. bi7, a sword.

butt-shaft (ii. 4. 18). an un-
barbed arrow used in shoot-
ing at butts. Cupid's arrow
was supposed not to bs
barbed.

canker (ii. 3. 30). a canker-
worm, living on the buds
and leaves of plants. Thus
in Tv&gt;o Oentiemen iff Verona,



t. 1. 4S; " In the sweetest
bud Tbe eating canker
dwells." &lt; O. ¥t. carun'e,
chancre



*0-



So



ker*d (i. 1. 1U2) means (1)
eaten away, ruated, cor-
roded; and then. (2) like a
cancer, roalignant.
chapless (iv. 1. 83), without a
chap, or lower jaw, aa in
Hamlet, v. 1. 87; " Chaplesa
and knocked about the



with






cheerlf (i. S. 16), cheerfully,
gladly; a cry of encourage-
ment used particularly by
sailors.

Cheveiil (ii, 4. 87), kidleather,
proverbial for its flexibility.
M. E. che,^elle &lt; O. Fr.
ckerreh, kid, — -diminutive of
chivre&lt;i Lat. capra, goat.

chop-logic (iii. S. 150). a per-
tou who chops logic, henc:e
a sophistical debater. N.
E. Diet, quotes Awdelay
(1561): " Choplogyke is he
that when his majstcr re-
buketh him of hys fault, he
wyll geve hym XX wordes
for one."

conceit (ii. 8. 30; iv. 3. 37).
something conceived in the
mind, imagination,

conduct (iii. I. 129; v. 3.
116), conductor, guide. Cf.
Richard ///.i. 1.45: "Hath
appointed This conduct to
conTe:y me to tbe Tower."

conjuration (v. 3. 08), adjura-
tion. So Henry V, i. 2.
29: " We charge you, in the
name of God. take heed.
. . . Under this conjura-
tion speak, my Lord."



cot-quean (iv. 4. 6). a man
doing household work or
busying himaelf with wom-
en's affaira. Probably &lt; cot,
cottage,-|- fuenn, A. S. euien,

countervail (ii. fl. 4), be of
equal value to. &lt; O. Fr.

coitlrevaloir, &lt; Lat. con-
tra, against, -|- vaUre, be of

date (i. 4. 3. lOS; v. 3. HO),
duration, term of existence.
So Titus Andronictit, i. 1.
168; " Outlive thy father's
days. And fame s eternal
date," Hence dateless (v.
3. 115), without limit of
time, eternal.

di^essing (iii. 3. 127), deviat-
ing, departing, as in Tam-
inff of the Shrew, iii, 2. lOB:
" I am come to keep my
word, Though in some part
enforced to digreaa."

diBtemperature (ii. 3. 40),

mental or physical diaordcr,
as in Penclea, v, 1. 27:
" Upon what ground is this
distemperature? " Hence,
distempei'd (ii. 3. 33), dis-
ordered.
dowdr (ii. 4. 43), slattern.

n-beat fiii. 1. 82; iv. 6.126),
eat soundly; so Pappe
idtk an Hatchet (1689):
" A yonger brother, that
means to drie beate those '
of the Elder house."
endart (i. 3. SS), thrust or
dart in, from the 6gure of

enpierced (i. 4. 19), piercerf,
wounded; sometimes spefled

impierced,
envious (i. 1. 157; iii. 1. 173;
iii. 8. 49), malignant, ma-



liciius, as frequently in

Shakespeare. In ii. ft. 4, 7
the word has its modern
aense ot " jealous."

fftntastico (ii. 4. SO), a fan-
tastical, eccentric person.
The only other instance of
the word cited by editors
is that by Steevens from
Dekker's Old Fortunatus:
" I baue reveld with kings,
daunced with Queenes, dal-
lied with Ijadiea, worne
straunge attires, . . ; seene
tantasticoes, conuerst with
humorists." It. fantastico.

fashion-monger (li. 4. 35),
one who affects the newest
fashions, top. Cf. Mar-
ston, Sco-uTge of ViUanie
(1598): " Each quaint fash-
ion-monger whose sole re-
pute Resla in his trim gay
clothes."

fee-simple (iii. 1. 33), abso-
lute possession. &lt; Anglo-
La t. feodum simplex, abso-
lute property.

fe;tle(iii. S. 154), prepare, make
ready. Possibly &lt; A. S.
f^eU a chain, a band.

flecked (ii. 3. 3). dappled,
spotted. Laagtand in Piers
Ploughman speaks ot
" toules, with flekked
fetheres."

Seer (i, 5. 59), lauah sc
fully, sneer. So Much Ado
ahovt Nothing, v. 1.
" Never fleer and jest
me." Ktymology uncertain
but probably connected with
Norw., Sw. flira, Dan. JUre,
grin.

flirt-Bill (ii. 4. 162), woman
of loose behavior. Cf. Beau-
mont and Fletcher, Knight



ARY 223

of the Burninj Pestle, iv. 1;
" Yon heard him take me
up like a flirt-gill, and sing
bawdy songs upon me."
&lt; flirt + uiW, a girl, a jill,
abbrev. of giUian &lt; Juli'
ana, &lt; Lat. Juliana, prop.

food (iii, 3. 52; iv. 5. 6i),
foolish, as in King Lear, iv.
7. 80: " I am a very foolish,
fond old man." M. E. fond,
fanned, pple. of fonnen, act
as a fool, possibly &lt; O. Fries.
/onne, &gt; Sw./dne. tool.

ghosU; (li. 2. 189; ii. 3. iS),
spiritual. In Shakespeare
the ward always has this

gOBsamer (ii 6. 18), fine
threads of a spider's silk
Boating in the air. M. E.
tos(e)someT(e). probably &lt;
g«3, goose -f somer, summer.
See N. E. Diet, for further

haviouT (ii. 2. 99), deportment,
bearing, behavior. &lt; Fr.
apeir, avoir, to have. The
initial A- was introduced
later from association with
the English form of the verb.
Not a clipped form ot be-
kavioF, which cornea from
the verb behave, and has a
separate history. .

hilding (ii. 4. 44; iii. 5. 169), a,
base, worthless man or .
woman. Etymology un-
certain; possibly &lt; A. S.
hiiiderling &lt; hiruier, behind, -|-

bind (i. I. T3), menial, ser&gt;
vant. &lt; M. E. ag. ftt'n*,
A. S. pi. hine, appariintly
from gen. pt. hina of kigan,
hitean, members of a house-



hold, domestics. So N. E.
Diet.
humour (i. 1. 1S5, 147; ii. 1.
7), whim, caprice. In this
sense the word is extremely
common ia late Elizabethan
literature. Thus arose the
" comedy of humours," in
which the fuQ is derived from
the peculiar whim governing
each character.
! Jack (ii. 4. 160; iii. 1. IS), a
fellow, a knave. So Richard
III, i. 8. 78: "Sinceevery
Jack became a gentleman.
There 's many a gentle per-

Jealous-hood (iv. 4. 13), per-
haps jealousy, and so, using
the abstract for the con-
crete, a jealous woman. N.
E. Diet, suggests that we
have here two words, hmxl
referring to the type of fe-
male head or the hood of a
spy, A. S. had; others explain
as the regular suffix &lt; A. S.
had, condition, as in Tiumhood,
woauinhood.

joint-stools (i. 5. 7), jointed
stools, folding chairs. Cf.
2 HenTy IV, ii. *. 869:
" jumps upon join'd stools
and swears with a good
grade,"

learn (iii. 8. 18; iv. 8. 17). teach,
as frequently in Shakespeare,
and still heard now.

loggerhead (iv. 4. 20) block-
head, stupid -person. The
first part of the word, ac-
cording to N. B, Diet., was
apparently " invented as
expressing by its sound the
notion of something heavy
and clumsy."

manmiet (iii. 5. 180), doll,



puppet, baby. Contracted
from Mahomet &gt; Maumet,
MairrmM, which came to
signify an idol because me-
dieval Christians believed
that the Mohammedans
were idolaters. See Green-
ough and Kittredge, Ward*
and their Ways, p. 877.

marchpane (i. 5. S), a cake
containing pounded almonds
and sugar. Nares gives a
recipe for the baking of one.
Probably &lt; Lat. Martius, of
Mars. " having towers, castles
and such like on them," -f-
pania, bread, through O. Fr.
mareepain,

marry (i. 8. 63; iv. 5. 8), a
common Elizabethan ejacu-
lation, probably derived
from the Qame of the



Virgm.



! (i.



10;



slow, stately dance
Much Ado, ii. 1. 80;
nerly — modest, as a i
full of state and anc
1 (ii. 4. 2«), in mi



. 5i), a



old I



I minim rest, a balf-



, (iii



158).



lade



pert by too much petting,
as in Tmo Genfiemen of
Verona, i. 8. 92: " You.

Or i (finally, a loved one, a
darling, Fr. mignon,

misadventure (v. 1. «9; v. 3.
188). ill adventure, mis-
chance, misfortune. So mis-
adventured (Piol. 7), un-
fortunate. Neither word
is used again by Shake-
speare.

mistemper'd (i. I. 94), un-



natural, i. e., not tempered
tor use in " civil brawls."
mis-Eheatlied {v. S. i05), ill
sheathed, placed in

mouse-hunt (iv. 4. 11), ob-
viously, a. worn an -hunter,
but whether derived from
the use oF mouse as a
term of endearment for a
woman, or figuratively from
ord denuting a weaael, a












See Fui



D the passage.
nice (iii. 1. 159; v. e. 18}.
triSing, unimportant, as in
Richard III, iii. 7. 175:
" The respects thereof are
nice and trivial." Theorigi-

foolish; then, foolishly par-
ticular as to trifles. O. Fr.
nice &lt; Lat. nesct'u!, ignorant.

o'er-perch (ii. 2. 66), fly over.
Used by Shakespeare no-
where else.

partisan (i. 1. 80, 101), "a
military weapon used . . .
by footmen in the sixteenth






eenth






consisting of a lung-handled
spear, the blade haviaj; one
or more lateral cutting pro-
jections, variously shaped,

theRisarme and the halberd"
(N. E. Did.).
pilcher (iii. 1. 84), probably
the leather scabbard of a
Bword. though no other in-
ftance of the word in that
sense is known; related to
pilch, a gown of skin or fur,
&lt; A. S, pfflece, &lt; L. Lat.
pellirea. fern. sing, of pfUi-
eeua, of skin, &lt; pellis, akin.



SARV 225

present (iv. I. 61; v. 1. 81),

immediate, instant, as fre-
quently in Shakespeare. So
presently (v. 1. 21), imme-
diately.

prick-song (ii. 4. 21), written
music in distinction from
■plain song. " The first
notes used were small, square
marks without stems, called
pricks, or points " (Clarke's
Dictionary of Musical
Terms),

princoi (i. B. 88), a pert youth,
a coxcomb, &lt; print -|- cock;
princock is another form of
the word.

pToperer (ii, 4, 217), better-
looking, handsomer; cf. Ai
Vou Like It. iii. 5. 51:" You
are a thousand times a

reeky (iv. 1. 83), " reeking
with malodorous vapors;
strictly smoky, and hence
foul" (Dowden).

ropery (ii. 1. 154), roguery,
rascality. Roperipe in Eliza-
bethan English signified ripe
for a ropa, worthy of hanging.
Roper mamt a roperipe person.
Dowden cites Beaumont and
Fletcher. The Chances, in. 1:
'• You '11 leave this ropery
When you come to my

runagate {iii. 5. 60), vagabond;
a corruption of M. E. ren-
egale, an apostate, a renegade
(due BccordmK to Skeat to
popular etymology with
Tunne a gale, run on the
road} &lt; 0. Fr. renegat &lt;
Low Lat. renejoius, pa. ppl.
of renegare &lt; re-, again -t-
negare, deny.

skains-mate (ii. 4. 162), p



22G GLOS

abl^ " cat-throat com-
panion " (Malone, Stee-
vens). niftle ruffian. N. E.
Diet, can throw no light on iU
derivation or meaning,
slop {li. i. 47), a form ot looac
trousers nSected in the six-
teenth century. So S
Henry IV, i. 8. S4, " about
the satin for my short
cloak and my slopa. Cf. O.
Norse aloppr, a long, loose
gown &lt; aleppa, to slip.

solemnity (i. 5. 59, 65; iv. 6.
61), a stately ceremony,
festivity, often referring to
a marriage feast; as in A
Midaummer Niykt'i Dream,
i. 1. 11; "the night Of our
solemnities."

Bpite (ii. I. 2T). mortification,
vexation. So Hamlet, i. 5.
189: " The time is out of
joint: O cursed spite. That
ever I was born to set it
. right! " In neither instance
does the word carry the
sense of personal malevo-
lence, malice, that it bears
to-day. Hence, in spite of
(i. 1. 85; i, 5. 64), for the
purpose of mortifying or
vexing.
. Btlll (i. 1. 177; ii. S. 27; iv. 8, 29)
ever, always, as frequently
in Shakespeare. Ct. ifac-
heih, V. S. 2: "The cry is
fltUl ' They come.' "

store (i. 2. 22), large number,
abundance.

sweeting (ii. 4, 83), a bind of
apple, called also bitter-

tassel-gentle (ii. 2. 160), ter-



cel-gentle, the male bswic,
used in falconry. M. E.
tercel, tercelet, O. Fr. (tercei

&lt; Late Lat. iertiolua, dimin-
utive of Lat.ter(iu», third. So
called either because the male
hawk was supposed to be a
third larger than the female,
or because it was supposed
that every third bird in the
neat was a male. The (aj»e(-
genlle and the fakon-gentle, so
termed because of their "fa-
miliar, courteous disposition,"
were commonly appropriated
to the prince in his hunting.

teen (i. 3. 13), sorrow, a»
Complaint of Venui, 808:
" My face is full of shame,
my heart of teen." M. E,
tene, A. S. tiona, reproach.

&lt; tSon. accuse.
tetchy (i. 3. 3i), peevish, fret-
ful, &lt; M. E. (mAe, tacht,
habit, vice &lt; O. Fr. teche, Fr.
lacke, spot, blemish.

trencher (i. 5. 2), a large
wooden plate. &lt; O. Fr.
trenckoir, a carving place &lt;
Irenther, to carve.
truckle-bed (ii. 1. 39), trundle-
bed, a bed on wheels which
might be pushed under a
larger bed.
versBl (ii. 4. 219). the Nurse's
word tor universal; a com-
mon vulgarism of the time-
wanton (ii. e. 178), "a merry
rogue, a tomboy " (Schmidt).
ware (i. I. 131; ii. 2. 103),
aware, as in A&gt; You Like
It, ii. 4. 58: " Thouspeakest
iser than thou art ware



,,Goo^le



INDEX OF WORDS



(The references are to the Notes ad loe. OOter vrorAi will be fo


in the GloiioTy.)




abused, iv. 1. 88.


but a part, i. i. 17.


Adam Cupid, ii. 1. 13.


"butcher of a silk button,


advanced, iv. 5. 78; v. 3. 06.


1.84.


adventure, ii. 8. 8*.


by and by. ii. 2. 161.


advbe, m. 6. 198.


candle-holder, i. 4. 38.


affecting, ii. 4. S9.


cannot choose but, iii. 6. 78.


aBate-atone. i. 4. 65.


"captain of complement^'


airy, i. 1. 98.


4.20.


aila aloecata, iii. 1. 77.


"carries it away," iii. 1. 77.


ally, iii. 1. 114.


"cany coals,:' i. 1. 1.


amazed, iii. 1. 1S9.


"carry no crotchets," iv. fl. 12


amen, iii. S. 2«9.


case, iv. 6. 99.


anatomy, iii. 3. 106.


catched,iv.6.48.


antic face. i. S. 5%.


charge, v. 2. 18.


any he. v. 1. 67.


chequering, ii. 3. 2.


ape, ii. 1. 18.




chinks, iv. 119-


as = as for example, iv. S. 39.


ehoking gall, i. 1. 200.


aspired, iu. 1. 182.


choler. i. 1. 1.


attach, V. 3. 173.




attending, ii. 2. 167.


civil, Prol. 4.


baked meats, iv. 4. 5.


closet, iv. 8. 33.


banquet, i. 5. 181.


clubs, i. 1. 80.


bare. V. 1. 68.




"bear a brain." i. 8. 89.


coil. ii. 5. 67.


becomed. iv. 8. 86.


"come near you," i. 5. 22.


be strange, ii. 2, 101.


comfortable, v. 3. 148.


"biteby lheear."ii. 4. 81.




bit with, i. 1. 157.




blaze, iii. 3. ISI.


concealed, iii. 3. 98.


bodes, L 4. 91.


conduit, iu. 5. 130.


booted. V. 1. 2.


confidence, ii. 4. 133.


bosom's lord. iv. 1. 8.


confines, ii. 8. 13.


boy. iii. 1. 69.


confusion's, iv. 6. 65.


"broadgoose,"ii. 4. 91.


conjure, ii. 1. 6.


brow. iii. 5. i».


consort, iii. 1.49.


"bum daylight," i. 4. 43.


contrary, i. 6. 87.



INDEX OF WORDS



convert, i. H, M,


flies, u. 4. 34.


counsel, ii. 8. 53.


"flower fd courtesy." ii. S. 44.


counterfeit, ii. 4._4B,




court-cupboard, i. 5. 8.


fool, i. 3. 31.


courtier's, i. 4. 77.


form. iL 1. 36.


courtship, iii. 3. M.


"tonn of wax," iii. 3. 126.


coumn, i. 6. 38.


"fortune's fool," iii. I. HI.


cross, iv. S. 5.


frank, ii. 2. 131.


crow, V. 2. 21.


friend, iii. S. 42.


CTow-keeper, i. 4. 6.


gear, v. 1. 60.


"cnishacup."i. 2. 86. '


give leave, i. 3. 7.


cures, i. e. 49.


gleek, iv. 6. 115.


curfew, iv. 4. 4.


"god-dew,"i.2.M;ii.4.115; iii.


clear, ii. 2. 190; v. 2. 19.


5, 173.




"God save the mark." iii. 2. 53.


deny, 1. 5, 21.


"goodthou."i. 6. 8.


desperate, iii. 4. 12.


gore-blood, iii. 2. 56.




gown, i. 1. 81.


DiAD'a wit. i. 1. 215.


grace, ii. 3. 28.


discovered, ii. 2. lOfl.


green, iv. 3. 42.


dispute, iii. 3. 63.


green eye, iii. S. 222.


distBDce, ii. 4. 21-2.


grey eye, ii. 4. 45.




a hall! i.5.28.


doctrine, i. 1. 244.


harlotry, iv. 2. 14.


"dog-8name."ii. 4. 223.


"have at thee," i. 1.79.


doubt, v. 8. 44.


heartless, i. 1. 73.


down - downsl^rs. iii. 5. 67.


hinds, i. 1, T5.


down = _in lied, iv. 5. 12.


his = its, ii. 6. 12; iv. 5. TO; v.




3. 203.


drawn,';, i. 73^77.


holp, i. 2. 48.


drifl, ii. S. 55; iv. 1. 114.


homely, ii. 3. 55.


dry, iii. S. 59.


hood. iii. 2. 14.


dump, iv. 6. 107-8.


honey, ii. 5. 18.


"Dun in the mire," i, 4, 41.


hoodwinked, i. 4. 4.


"dun's the mouse," i. 4. 40.


house, ii. 4. 25.


elfJocks. i. 4. 00.




endart, i. 3. SS.


hunt's-up, iii. 5. 34.


exhales, iii. 5. 13.


hurdle, iii. 5. 156.


eipire, i. 4. 109.


ill. iv. 2. 6.


extremes, iv. 1. 62.


in = into. V, 1. 38.


■h. iv. 5. 121.


in good time, i. 2. 45.
b happy time, iii. 6. 112.


wr, ii. Prol. 3.


■deling, iii. 5. T5.


inauspicious, v. S. 3,


I eld-bed, U. 1.40.


inconstant, iv. 1. 119.


film, i. 4. 63.


indite, ii. 4. 135.


fine, i. 5. 96.


inherit, i. 2. 30.


"fivewiWi. 4. 47.


"keep no great ado," iiL 4. 23,



INDEX OF WORDS



kmdly, ii. 4. 69.

label, iv. 1. 57.

lace, iii, fi. 8.

lady. ii. 4. 1S7.

"lady o£ my earth," i. i. 15.

lady-bird, i. 3. 3.

Lamtnas-tide, i. 3. 15.]

lantern, v. 3. 84.

Uth, i. 4. 5.

"lazy finger," i. 4. 66,

lazy-pacing, it. 2. 31.

lent, iiL S. 166.

let, iu i. 69.

level, iii. 3. 103,

like, i. 4. 6.

"iikehe,"iii. 5. 84.

like 1^, t. 3. 96.

living, iv. 6. 40.

long aword, i. 1. 88.

made = was doing, v. 3. 280.
"makes dainty," i. 6. 21.
manage, ill. 1. 48.
niandrakea, iv. S. 47.
mangle, iii. 2. 88.
'■nJBQ ot wai," i. 3. 76.
margent, i. 3. 86.
mark, i. 3. 59; iii. 2. 53



mean, iii. 3. 45.
mend, i. S. 81.
"mewed up," iii. 4. 11.
minstrel, iv. 6. 115.
modern, iii. 2. 120.
morning's eye, iii. 5.
much upon. i. 3. 72.
natural, ii. 4. 9fl.
naught, iii. 2. 87.
needy, iii. 6. 108.
nothmg, i. 1. 119.
nuptial, i. S, 37.
O, ui. 8. 90. '



19.



1.45.

old, iii. 3. B4.
orchard, ii. 1. 6.
osier cage, ii. 3. 7.
' outrage, v. 3. 218.



OTerwhelmiug, v. I. 39,

owe, ii. 2. 46.

"parties ot suspicbn," v. S. 228.

passing, i. 1. 240.

pastry, iv. 4. B,

patience perforce, i. 5, 01.

peppered, iii. 1. 102.

perdema mw'. ii. 4. 35.

pestilent, iv. 6. 14?.

pin, u. 4. 15.

pitch, i. 4. 21.

plantain, i. 2. 62.

''poor Jobn," i. 1. 37.

post, V. S. 273.

presence, v. 3. 86.

preserving, i. 1. 200.

pretty, iv. 1. 185,

prevails, iii, 3. 60.

procures, iii. 5. OS.

prodi^us, i. 5. 142.

prolixity, i. 4. 3.

proof, i. 1. 218.

propagate, i. 1. 193.

proportion, ii. 4. 24-2.

putted, i. 1. 197.

quote, i. 4. 31.

quoth, i, 3. 35.

read by rote. ii. 3. 88.

rearward, iii. 2. 121.

"reason coldly," iii. 1. 65.

rebeck, iv. 5. 132.

reckoning, i. 2. 4.

reflex, iii. 6. 20.

respect, ii. 3. 90.

"re^ective lenily," iii. 1. 128.

"rest you merry," i. 2. 65,

retorts, iii. 1. 160.

re, iv. 5. 121.

rosemary, ii. 4. 228; iv. 5. 79.

"runaways' eyes," iii. 2. 6.

rushed, iii. 3. 28.

rushes, i._4. 36.

sadness, i. 1. 205.

"aaucy merchant," ii. 4. 153,

scant, i. 2. 104.

gerving-creature, iv. 5, 117-8.



230



INDEX OF WORDS



110.



"set cock-a-hoop," i.
"set up my leai," v.
shake, i. 3. 33.
Bhield, iv. 1. 41.
"sick and green," ii. i. S.
Bingle-soled," u. 4. 65-70.
sir-reverence, i. 4. 48.
smatter, iii. S. Hi.
smooth, iii. t. 08.
so ho! ii. 1. 186.
"sorted out," iii. 5. 110.
Eped, Iii. 1. S4.
speed, V. 3. 121.
Bpiimera, i. i. 59.
spite, i. 1. 8S; i. 5. 64.

spoke him tmr," iii. 1. 158.
"stand on sudden haste," ii. i
Btoy, ii. 6. 38: iv. 3. 67.
steads, ii. 3. 54.
straight, ii. 5. 73.
strange love, iii. 2. IS.
strucken,i.l.iS8.
swashing, i. 1. TO.
sweet wat«r, v. 8. 14,
"switch and spur," u. 4. 73.
swounded, iii. 2. 56.
sympathy, iii. 3. 85-6.
" lake me with you," iii.
"take the wall," i. 1. 15.
take truce, iii. 1. 162,
tall, ii. 4. 31.
tallow-face, iii. 5. 158.
tender, iii. S. 186.
that = so that, iii. 6. 90.
"thievish ways," iv. I. 79.
thoron^ iL i. 15.



142.



41.



thought long, iv
time, ii. 4. 21-2.
timeless, v. 3. 168.
to-mght, ii. 4. 2.
tor«i, i. 4. 11.
thou'3, i. 3. 8.

IT from, iii. 1. 82.
uoattainted. i. 2. 90.
unbmised, ii. 8. 87.

comfortable, iv. 6. 60.

even, iv. 1. 5.

Diamied, iii. 8. 14.
unstufled, ii. 3. 37.
utters. V. 1 . 67.
validity, iii. 8. 88.
vanished, iii. 3. 10.
" 1. 175, 177.

walk," iii. i. 78.
wanting of, ii. 2, 7S.
"was I with you," ii. 4. 78.
weak, ii. 4. 180.
weeds, v. 1. 89.

what, i.



:. 67.



"wisely too fair," i. 1. 227,
"with a letter." ii. 1. 280.
withal, i. 1. 119.
without-book, i. 4. T.



,,Goo^le



GENERAL INDEX



Abbott, A Skakeapearian Gram-
mar, i. 1. 119, 157, 165, 183,

238; i. «. 14, 23, 48, 101; i. 3.

96; i. i. 91; i. 5. 8; ii. 2. 61;

ii. 3. 27, 51, 52, 92; ii. 4. 22;

ii. 5. 60; ii. 6. 1!, i5; iii. 2. 98;

iii. 3. 88; iiL S. 82, 81, 91, 99;

iv. 1. 182; iv. 2. 28; iv. 4. 26;

V. 1. 36, 67; v. 3. 214. 2*7.
accentuation, ii, 1. 6. See also

Appendix D.
(M, omission of, i. 1. 165; ii. 3. 92.
Of. redundant, v. 3. 247.
astrology, belid in, Prol. 6; v,

S. 111.
AtiaTdic Mmtkly, i. i. 47.
aubode. iii, 5. 34.
Balthazar, v. 1. 22,
Beaumont and Fletcher. Kniaki

&lt;tf ifte Burning Pfttle, i. 3. 38,
Beavolio, i, I. 71; ii, 4. 33, 135;

iii. 1. 11, 157 H.; V. 3. 211.
Beounilf, iii. 2. 162.
Bovdon, Religion of Skaketpeare,

iv. 1. 38.
Brooke, Romeus and Juliet, i.



Cambridge editors, i. 5. 120; iu

4. 3S; iii. 3, 85-6,
Capell, iii. 3. 26,
Capulet, i. 1. 81, 83; i. «, 14. 17;

■ ■ 32, 78; iii. 5. introd., 142,



158, 173; i

iv. 5. 25 ff., Sa,
Chambers, i. 5, 195; i.

iii. 2. 6; v. 3.828 ff.
Chaucer, i. 4. 41, 51; i

■■" «. 73; "



. 4. 6;



t. 21.



109;



. 46;



trod.;

40; ii, 2, 14i-8. 152;
ii. 6. 3-8; iu. 2. 15, 69. 90, 142;
iii. 3. 71 ff., 109. 119; iii. 5, 43,
119, 130. 166. 192, 214 ff.;
1, 68 ff., 89-120, 109, 119;
e. 31: iv. 3. 1; iv. 4. 6; iv
32. 41. 84; v. 1, 18, 45 ff.. 60;
V. 2. 5; V. 3. 1, 97, 228 _ff., 229,
308. See also Appendix B,
Browning, In a Balcony, ii. 6.



Chester, Love's Martyr, v

Cicero, i, 1. 134.

Clarke, iii. 1. 113; iii, 5. 59, 97-

100; V. 1. 24.
Collier, i, I. 217; ii. 4. 91. 180;

ii. 5. IS: iii. 2. 6; iii. 3. 26.
conceits, i. 1. 200, 218; i. 3. 81-

94; ii. 3. 3, 72; U. 5. lS-5; iL

6.10; iii. 2, 21-6, 83-4, 114 ff.;

iii. 3. 2-3, 29, 64-5; iii. 6. 181-

8; V. 3. 117.
Cook, I 1. 184.
Coryat, Crudities, iv, 1. 109.
Cotgrave, iii. 5. 34.
Daniel, P. A., i. 3. 33; iii, 2. 6;

iii. 3, 85-6.
Daniel, Comj^int of Rotamund,

V. 3. 94-6, I03-S,
dawn, pictures of, ii. 3. 1-8.
debate between heart and eyes. ii.

Delsker, ii. 4. 19; i!i, S. 142; iv.

6. 79.
Delius. i, I. 128; i, 6. 58; ii. 4.
' 91; iii, 2. 6; iii, 3.89-6.
Dickens. A Tale of Two Citia.



GENERAL INDEX



double negative, iii. I. 5S.

Douce, i. 1. 6. 89.

Dowden. i. 1. 70, IBS. 300, 228;

i. 2. 9, 16; i. 3. 36, 78; i. 4. 109;

i. 5. 96; ii. 1. 13; ii. 4. 34, 153;

iii. 1. 106; iii. 2. fi; iii. 3. 10;

iii. 5. 4S, 17e, Hi; iv. 1. 6,

dragon in cave with gold, iii. 2. 74.
Drake, Francis, ii. 2. 88.
dramatic irony, ii. 2. 139.
Drayton, i. i. 53.
Dyce, i. S. 1, 76; ii. 4. 78, 153;

iii. 2. 6; iii. 4. 31.
earthquake of 1580, i. 3. 23.
Edwards. "A Song to the Lut«,"

iv. 6. 128.
Elizabeth. Queen, i. 1. 214-26.
ethical dative, ii. 4. 22; iii. 1. 6.
evening maas, iv. 1. 38.
evil spirits, i. 4. 89.
Fair Maid of Brwtoto. The, ii. 4.

163.
Faire Em. i. 3. 76.
Farmer, iii. 2. 8fi-fi.
fatalism, i. 4. 106.
Field, A Woman U a Wealha-coek,

i. 3. 76.
"first and second cause," ii. 4. 26.
Fletcher, The WM-Qoose Chtue,

i. 1. 70; iii. 2. 89-6.
Franciscan order, ii. 3. 7.
Friar Laurence, ii. 3. introd.;

ii. 6. 9-16; iv, 6. 65; v. 2. in-

trod.; V. 3. introd, 131, 239,

308.
Fuller, ii. 2. 24; v. 3. 70. See also

Free- town, i. 1. 109.

Fumess, Variorum Shakeapeare,

iu. 2. 8.
Gascoigne, i. 1. 38.
gerundial infinitive, i. I. 103.
Giflord, i. 4. 41.
"give and take" dialogue, iv. I.

Greene, L 1. 222; ii. 2. 93, 101.



Guilpin, Skialelhtia, ii 4. 47-8.
Hales, iii. 2. 6.
HaUiwetl-Phillips, L 6. 104; E

4. 47-8.
HanforU. u. 8. 68. -
Hanmer, ii. 5. 73.
Harvey, i. 1. 70.
Hawes, i. 4. 47.
Heath, iii. 2. 6.

Herford, i. 1. 216, 235; iii. 2. 6.
Heywood, J., The Pardoner and

the Friar, iii. 5. 172.
Heywood, T.. A Woman KiUed

wiik Kindneaa, iii. 5. 29.
Holinshed, ii. 4. 65-70.
Hudson, i. 1. 131; iii. 2. 6.
impersonal use of verbs, i. g. 86;

ii. 2. 61.
Italjanate dueling fashions, iL 4.

introd.; ii. 4. 26.
Jackson, iii. 2. 6.
Jameson, Mrs. iii. 2. 26.
Johnson, Samuel, i. 2. 26; iiL 3.

134; iii. 6. »7-100; iv. 1. 30.
Jones, Inigo, i. 6. 104.
Jonson. Ben, 1. 1. 4; L 3. 3, 66.'

ii. 4. 21-2, 26, 223.
Juliet, 1. 3. introd.; ii. 2. 64, 142-

8; iii. 2, I ff., 28; iii. 5. introd-

26. 97-100, 119, 122, 142, 206.

22B, 434; iv. 1. introd., 18-38.

44-5; iv. 2. introd.; iv. 3.

introd., 2, 19; v. 1. introd.;

Kei^htley, ii. 5. 16; in. 3. 10.
Kemp, Will. iv. 5. 101.
King Cophetua, ii. 1. 14.
King Lor, iii. 5. 186; iv. S. 41.
Kittredge and Greenough, Wordi

and Ikeir Way*, iii. 2. 53.
Knight, iii. 2. 6.
Lady CapuUt, i. 1.83; i. 8. 72;

iii. 5. 89-92; v. 3. 807, 210.
lark, iii. 6. 21-2, 31.
Latimer, i. 4. 59.
length of play's performance^

Prol. 12.



GENERAL INDEX



Lettaom, i. 5, 94.
Litlledale, i. 4. 30.
Longman's Magaxine, iJL 2. 8.
love-language, i. 1. 178.
lover's sigh, i. 1. 167; ii. t. 1'

ii. 8. 85; v. 1. 10.
Lyley, Euphuei, i. i. 109; iii.

55; V. 1. 61.
iiadmeD. treatment of, i. 3. 55-7.
\Ialqne, i. 1. 2*7; i. 3. 86;

40; ii. 8. 39, 76, 152; ii. 4. 65-



70;



. 122; i



187, 130;
Marlowe, i. 2. 9; ii. 5. 93; iii.

188; iii. 8. 1; iv. 1. 81; v. 1.
Mason, i. 3. 88; iu. 2. 114,
matclies, iii. 3. 138.
Mercutio, i. 8. 70; i. 4. introd.;

ii. 4. 15; iii. 1. introd., II, 15,

48, 108, 113, 194.
meteors, iii. 5. 13,
Milton, i. 1. 85; ii. S. 8, 9-10;

iii, 2. 9; iii. 5. 19; iv. S. 132.
Modem Language Notes, i. 1. 134;

ii. 3. 88.
Monosyllabic lines, iv. 1. 44-5.
Montagues, i. 1. 38; v. 3. 810.
morning, ileiiciiptions of. ii, 3. 1-6,
Munro, v. I. 4. See also Brooke,
Nash, ii. 1. 16; ii. 4. 19, 47-8.
Nation, The, ii. 3. 68.
Naylor, Shaketpeare and Music,

iv. 5. 103.
Neilson, U. 1. 13; iii. 2. 6; iii. 3.

85-6.
New English Dielionary, i. 2. 4;

i. 3. 29, 36; i. 5. 83; iii. 5. 8,

34, 156; iv. 4. 4.
news (plural), ii. 5. 28,
Niebelungerdied, iii. 2, 74.
Nurse, i. 3. 4, 83; u. 4. 169. 883;

iii. 8. 142; iii. 3. 146. 159; iii.

a. introd.. 229. 834; iv. 3. 2;

iv. 4. 5. 6-8; v. 3. 308.
Piunter, Palace of Pleasure, i. 8. 9.

ii. 3. 1; iii. 2. 92; iii. 3. 71 ff.

See also Appendix B.



PaTadyH of Daynty Demies, iv,
5. 188.

Paris, Count, i. 2. introd.; v. 8.
introd.. 1. 59.

participle, past, i. 1. 236.

Patient Orisad, i. 4. 40.

Peele, Old Wivei Tale, I S. 33.

Percy, ReHques, iL I. 14; ii. 4.
151; iv. 5. 128.

Peter, ii. 4. 189; v. 3. 101, 135.

pelrarchisms, ii. 8. 24.

pilgrim disguise, i. 5. 104.

Pleasant BaUad of Two Lovers, A,
iv, 6. 107.

plural nomu treated as singular,
i. a. 101; iii, 6. 107; v. 3.
214.

Pope. i. 1. 134; i. 3. 98; i. 4. 77;
ii. 5. 15; iii. 1. 62; iv. 1. 78;
iv. 5. 135.

pronouns, possessive transposed,
iu. 8. 98; piissesaive lued ob-
jectively, ii. 3. 51; relative
omitted, iii, S. 92; who for
inanimate objects, i. 1. 118; i.
4,100.

proverbs, i. 1. 17; i. 3. 89; i. 5.
16; ii. 8. 93; ii. 4. 82; iu. 4. 4;
iv. 1. 21; V. 3. 90.

proverbs. Bay's Collectioa of, ii.

Puttenham, AH of English Poesy,

iv, 2. 6.
Queen Mab. i. i. S3.
Quibbles, i. 1. 143; i. 3. 13; i. 4.

12; i. 5. 120; ii. 1, 31; ii. 2.

106; ii. 4. 12, 36, 39, 47-8, 55,

65-70, 82; ii, 6. 34; iii. 1, 40,

59, 108; iii. 2. 14, 45, 121; iii.

3. 41, 45, 98; iii, 4. 8; iii. 5. 67,

97-100, 127-31; iv. 5. 72. 99.

120,121,185,132; v.3.90,110,

179-80.
Ray's collection of proverbs, ii. 4.

8«.
redundant words, ii. Prol. 3; iii.



1.58;



S. 247.



GENERAL INDEX



reflexive use at verbs, ii. 3. 37; iv.

1. 182; V. 8. 8.
Reynard Ihe Fox, ii. 4. 19.
rhymed couplets, i. 1. 183.
Biche, Fareadi, iii. i. I.
RoUe, i, 3. 97; iii. 1. 8«; iu. S.

183; iv. 1. 18-36; iv. 5. 32; v.
. 1. 10;_v. 3. ii07.
' Komeo, i. I. introd.; i. 2. introd.;

52; 1.4.1.11.51,106; ii, 4, 03-

4; iii 8. 119; iii. 5. 31-7; v.

1.4.24; v.3.iiitrod.;41,6»,87,

111, 117.
Rosaline, i. 2. 72.
Rowe, Prol. 8.

Rychardes, Misogmau, iv. 5. 103.
Schmidt, A Shakespeare Lexiam,



Scott, Lady of the Lake,



i. 2. 30.



17.
Scriptures.
Selimu), iii. s. so.
Seneca'fl trftRediea, iv. 5. 49 ff.
serpent in Eden. iii. 2. 73.
Bestette. See sonnet-forms.
Silver, Paradoxes of D^eiice, a.

4.24.
Sir John OMcaMe, i. 4. 41.
Skeat's edition of Chaucer, Iii. i.

78; V. I. 4.
Smith, Commonwealth of England,

iii. 1. 4.
sonnet-torma, i. 2. 46-51, 93-8;

i, 5. 95-108; v. S. 12-7, 305-10.
stage setting, iii. 5. a. d.
stars. See astrology.
Staunton, i. 3. 81-94; ii 4. 24;

ii. 6. 34.
Steevens. i. 5. 29; ii. 2. 101; ii.

4. 21-2: ii. 8- 32; iii. 2. 9, 92;

iii. 3. 29, 41, 85-6, 132; iii. 4.

12; iv. 3. 107, 132; v. 1. 3, 8,

77 ff., 90, 94-6.



strong preterit for weak, i. 2.



. 31; i



. 42;



2, 14 ff.; V. 1.

24, 103. See also Appendix C.
Struck, i. 1. 215.
Sntanna, ii. 4. 161,
sycamore, i. 1. 126.
Tartar's bow, i, 4. 5.
Tennyson, Maud, ii. 6. 17.
textual notes. Prol. 8; i. 1. 44,

134, 159, 161. 183, 186, 217;

i. 2. 13, 20, 102; i. 8. 86, 88,

98; 1.4.42.58,77,103,111; i.

5. 47, 90, 120; ii. Prol. 3; ii. 1.

13, 14; ii, 2. 8, 31. 39. 152; ii.

8. 22, 30; ii. 4. 85, 37, 73, 91,

121-2; ii. S. IS, 73; ii. 6.

introd., 17; iii. 1. 118; iu, 2.

«, 53; iii, 3, 10, 26, 41, 85-«;

iii. 6. 43, 122, 127, 166. 234,

iv. 1, 78; iv. 3. S8; iv. 4.*;

iv. 3, 185; v. 1. 1; v. 3.

170. 211.
I/tat used for if, ii, 0. 25.
Theobald, i. 1. 159; i. 2. 102; i.

5. 57, 06; ii. 4, 85, 37.
tidings, either singular or plural.

iii, 5. 107.
time, marks of, ii. 6. 1; iv, 1, 105;

iv. 2. 38; iv, 4. 4; v. 8. 176.
toad, iii. 5. 81.^
tragic irony, ii. 6. introd,; iii. 5.

61-7; V. 1.4.
Troublesome Reign of King John,

The, iv. 5. 41.
Two Noble Kinmnea, The; iii. 3,

Tybalt, i. 1. 65, 71; i. 6, introd,

78; iii. 1. introd. 77.
Ullici, iv. 2. 78; iv. 5, 121,
Upton, ii. 1. 13.
Vergil, /Eneid, iii. 5. 52-3.
verb preceding subject, ii. 3.

62.



GENERAL INDEX



ssa



Verplanck, i



. 2. 6.



Warburton, iii. t. 8.

Warner, AlhiorCt England, iii.

8. 47.
Weakest Goetk to the WaU, The,



Webaier'i IjUemaiional Dicfwa-
ary, i. I. 198; iii. 1. 10«.

Wendell, i. 2. 9r iii. 2. 9.

White, ii. I. 13; ii. S. 15; iii. 2.
6; iv. 5. 49 ff.

Wordsnorth, Laodamia, ii. 6. 9-
15.



..Google



DinivHi,, Google
